.TH "FTNCHEK 4.0" 1L "July 2012"
.\" ====================================================================
.\"  @Troff-man-file{
.\"     author          = "Robert K. Moniot",
.\"     version         = "4.0",
.\"     date            = "23 July 2012"
.\"     time            = "12:00:00 EST",
.\"     filename        = "ftnchek.man",
.\"     address         = "Fordham University
.\"                        New York, NY 10023
.\"                        USA",
.\"     telephone       = "+1 212 636 6334",
.\"     email           = "moniot@fordham.edu",
.\"     codetable       = "ISO/ASCII",
.\"     keywords        = "Fortran, syntax check, type declarations",
.\"     supported       = "yes",
.\"     docstring       = "This file is the source for the UNIX manual
.\"                        page document (ftnchek.1), and is also used to
.\"                        generate the flat ASCII version of the
.\"                        documentation (ftnchek.doc), the PostScript
.\"                        version (ftnchek.ps), the HTML version, the blurb
.\"                        used for informational mailings (blurb.txt), and
.\"                        the VMS HELP document (ftnchek.hlp) used to make a
.\"                        HELP library file.  For the latter, define the
.\"                        number register ``h'' to be nonzero (nroff -rh1),
.\"                        and filter the output thru col (see the Makefile).
.\"                        The blurb is created by setting number register
.\"                        ``b'' nonzero (nroff -rb1).  The different text
.\"                        blocks for these variations are set off using
.\"                        .if reg-name ... where reg-name is
.\"                        \nb for the blurb and \nh for the HELP document.
.\"                        The HTML version is produced using man2html, whose
.\"                        output is lightly edited (using patch) and then
.\"                        split up and put into the html directory by
.\"                        the shell script make_html.sh.
.\"
.\"                        If the next line after these comments is not
.\"                        ``.ie \nh \{'' then the HELP and blurb
.\"                        materials have been removed and this file is
.\"                        ftnchek.1.  You should edit only ftnchek.man
.\"                        and remake ftnchek.1 et al from it."
.\"
.\"  }
.\" ====================================================================
.ie \nh \{
.po 0
.ll 70
.de PP
.in 1
.ti +5
..
.de IP
.in 1
.ti 5
.sp 1
..
.de TP
.in 8
.ti -4
..
.de RE
.in 1
..
.in 0
1 FTNCHEK
.PP
\}
.el \{
.SH "NAME"
\}
ftnchek \- Fortran program checker
.if !\nh \{
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ftnchek
[
.BR \- [ no ] arguments [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] array [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] brief
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] calltree [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] check
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \-columns [ = \fInum\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] common [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] crossref [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] declare
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] division
]
[
.BR \-errors [ = \fInum\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] extern
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] f77 [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] f90 [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] f95 [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] help
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] identifier\-chars [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-include= \fIstr\fP
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] intrinsic [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] library
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] list
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] makedcls [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] mkhtml [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BI \-module= \fIstr\fP
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] novice
]
[
.BI \-output= \fIstr\fP
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \-pointersize [ = \fInum\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] portability [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] pretty [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] project [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] pure
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] quiet
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] resources
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] sixchar
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] sort
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] source [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] style [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] symtab
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] truncation [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \- [ no ] type [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BR \- [ no ] usage [ = \fIlist\fP]
]
[
.BR \- [ no ] version
]
.if n .ti +5
[
.BR \-wordsize [ = \fInum\fP]
]
[
.BR \-wrap [ = \fInum\fP]
]
[
.I files ...
]
\}
.ie \nh \{
.in 0
2 Introduction
\}
.el \{
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\}
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP (short for Fortran checker)
is designed to detect certain errors in a
Fortran program that a compiler usually does not.
\fBftnchek\fP is not primarily
intended to detect syntax errors.  Its purpose is to assist the user in finding
semantic errors.  Semantic errors are legal in the Fortran language but are
wasteful or may cause incorrect operation.  For example, variables which are
never used may indicate some omission in the program; uninitialized variables
contain garbage which may cause incorrect results to be calculated; and
variables which are not declared may not have the intended type.
\fBftnchek\fP is
intended to assist users in the debugging of their Fortran program.  It is not
intended to catch all syntax errors.  This is the function of the compiler.
Prior to using \fBftnchek\fP,
the user should verify that the program compiles
correctly.
.PP
The language accepted by \fBftnchek\fP is Fortran 95 (with some
exceptions noted in the section on limitations and extensions).
.ie \nh \{
For more detailed information, consult the printed documentation.
\}
.el \{
.\" Omit the following paragraph from the blurb
.if !\nb \{
.PP
This document first summarizes how to invoke \fBftnchek\fP.
That section should be read before beginning to use \fBftnchek\fP.
Later sections describe \fBftnchek\fP's
options in more detail, give an example of its use, and explain
how to interpret the output.  The final sections mention the limitations
and known bugs in
\fBftnchek\fP.
\}
.\" End of paragraph omitted from the blurb
.SH "INVOKING FTNCHEK"
\}
.if \nh \{
.in 0
2 Invoking_Ftnchek
.PP
\}
\fBftnchek\fP is
invoked through a command of the form:
.sp 1
.ce 1
\fC$ ftnchek [-option -option ...] filename [filename ...]\fR
.PP
The brackets indicate something which is optional.  The brackets
themselves are not actually typed.  Here options are command-line
switches or settings, which control the operation of the program and the
amount of information that will be printed out.  If no option is
specified, the default action is to print error messages, warnings,
and informational messages, but not the program listing or symbol tables.
.PP
.ie \nh \{
Each option begins with the '/' character.
(\fBftnchek\fP also allows the '-' character to be used.)
\}
.el \{
Each option begins with the '\-' character.
(On VAX/VMS or MS-DOS systems you may use either '/' or '\-'.)
For the sake of conformity with a common convention, options can
also begin with '\-\-'.
The options are described at greater length in the next section.
\}
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP options fall into two categories: switches, which are either
true or false, and settings, which have a numeric or string value.  The
name of a switch is prefixed by 'no' or 'no-' to turn it off:
e.g. \fB\-nopure\fP
would turn off the warnings about impure functions. The 'no' prefix
can also be used with numeric settings, having the effect of turning
off the corresponding warnings.
Settings that control lists of warnings have a special syntax discussed
below.
Only the first 3
characters of an option name (not counting
.ie \nh the '/')
.el     the '\-')
need be provided.
A colon may be used in place of an equals sign for numeric or string setting
assignments; however, we show only the equals sign form below.
.if !\nh \{
.PP
The switches and settings which \fBftnchek\fP currently recognizes are
listed below.  For each option, the default is the value used if the
option is not explicitly specified, while the turn-on is the value
used if the option is given without assigning it a value.
.TP
.BI \-arguments= list
Control warnings about subprogram type and argument mismatches.
Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-array= list
Control warnings in checking array arguments of subprograms.
Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-brief
Use shorter format for some error messages.  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-calltree= list
Produce subprogram call hierarchy in one of 3 formats:
text call-tree, who-calls-who and VCG.
Default = none, turn-on = tree,prune,sort.
.sp 1
If the \fB\-mkhtml\fP option is invoked \fIand\fP \fBtree\fP is the applied
calltree option, a file named \fCCallTree.html\fR, will be produced
depicting the tree in HTML format.
.TP
.B \-check
Perform checking.  Default = yes.
.TP
.BI \-columns= num
Set maximum line length to \fInum\fP columns. (Beyond
this is ignored.)  Turn-on = max = 132.  Default = 72.
.TP
.BI \-common= list
Set degree of strictness in checking COMMON blocks.
Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-crossref= list
Print cross-reference list of subprogram calls, label usage, and/or
COMMON block use.  Default = none.
.TP
.B \-declare
Print a list of all identifiers whose datatype is not
explicitly declared.  Default = no.
.TP
.B \-division
Warn wherever division is done (except division by a
constant).  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-errors= num
Set the maximum number of error messages per cascade.  Default =
turn-on = 3.
.TP
.B \-extern
Warn if external subprograms which are invoked
are never defined.  Default = yes.
.TP
.BI \-f77= list
Control specific warnings about supported extensions to the Fortran 77
Standard.  Default  = none, turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-f90= list
Control specific warnings about supported extensions to the Fortran 90
Standard.
Default  = none, turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-f95= list
Control specific warnings about standard Fortran 77
features that were deleted from the Fortran 95 Standard.  Default  =
none, turn-on = all.
.TP
.B \-help
Print command summary.  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-identifier\-chars= list
Define non-alphanumeric characters that may be used in identifiers.
Default = turn-on = dollar sign and underscore.
.TP
.BI \-include= path
Define a directory to search for INCLUDE files before searching in the
system-wide directory.
Cumulative.  Default = turn-on = none.
.TP
.BI \-intrinsic= list
Control treatment of nonstandard intrinsic functions.  Default =
all except \fBvms\fP for Unix version, all except \fBunix\fP
for VMS version, all except \fBunix\fP and \fBvms\fP for other
versions.  Turn-on = all.
.TP
.B \-library
Begin library mode: do not warn about subprograms
in file that are defined but never used.  Default = no.
.TP
.B \-list
Print source listing of program.  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-makedcls= list
Prepare a file of declarations.  The \fIlist\fP specifies options for
the format of this file.  Default = none, turn-on = declarations.
.TP
.BI \-mkhtml= list
Create individual HTML document files from ftnchek analysis and code comments.
Usually you will also want to specify \fB\-call=tree\fP to create the
root HTML file \fCCallTree.html\fR.
Default = none, turn-on = documents.
.TP
.BI \-module= path
Define a directory into which to write module files, and also
to search for module files referenced in USE statements.
Default = directory of source file, turn-on = none.
.TP
.B \-novice
Give output suitable for novice users.  Default = yes.
Advanced users will want to turn this off to give output suitable for
parsing by IDEs and context-aware editors like \fBemacs\fP.
.TP
.BI \-output= filename
Send output to the given file.
Default and turn-on sends output to the screen. (Default filename
extension is \fI.\|lis\fP).
.TP
.BI \-pointersize= num
Set the size of ``Cray pointer'' variables to \fInum\fP bytes.  Min =
1, max = 16.  Default = turn-on = 4
.TP
.BI \-portability= list
Warn about non-portable usages.  Default = none, turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-pretty= list
Give warnings for possibly misleading appearance
of source code.    Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-project= list
Create project file (see explanation below).  Default =
no.
.TP
.B \-pure
Assume functions are pure, i.e. have no side effects.
Default = yes.
.TP
.B \-quiet
Produce less verbose output.  Default = no.
.TP
.B \-resources
Print amount of resources used in analyzing the program.
Default = no.
.TP
.B \-sixchar
List any variable names which clash at 6 characters length.
Default = no.
.TP
.B \-sort
Print list of subprograms sorted in prerequisite order.
Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-source= list
Select source formatting options: fixed or free form, DEC Fortran
tab-formatted lines, VMS-style INCLUDE statement,
UNIX-style backslash escape sequences,
and implicit typing of parameters.  Default = none (fixed or free form
inferred from file extension), turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-style= list
Produce extra-picky warnings about obsolescent or old-fashioned
programming constructions.  Default = none, turn-on = all.
.TP
.B \-symtab
Print symbol table and label table for each subprogram.  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-truncation= list
Check for possible loss of accuracy by truncation.
Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-type= list
Check for issues related to user-defined types.
Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.BI \-usage= list
Control warnings about unused or uninitialized variables, common
blocks, etc.  Default = turn-on = all.
.TP
.B \-version
Print version number.  Default = no.
.TP
.BI \-wordsize= num
Set the default word size for numeric
quantities to \fInum\fP bytes.  Default = turn-on = 4 bytes.
.TP
.BI \-wrap= num
Set output column at which to wrap long error messages and
warnings to the next line.  If set to 0, turn off wrapping.  Default =
turn-on = 79.
\}
.PP
.ie \nh \{
When more than one option is used, they should be separated by a blank
space.
\}
.el \{
When more than one option is used, they should be separated by a blank
space, except on systems such as VMS where options begin with slash ( / ).
\}
No blank spaces may be placed around the equals sign ( = ) in a setting.
\fCftnchek "?"\fR
will produce a command summary listing all options and settings.
.PP
For settings that take a list of keywords, namely
\fB\-arguments\fP,
\fB\-array\fP,
\fB\-calltree\fP,
\fB\-common\fP,
\fB\-crossref\fP,
\fB\-f77\fP,
\fB\-f90\fP,
\fB\-f95\fP,
\fB\-intrinsic\fP,
\fB\-makedcls\fP,
\fB\-mkhtml\fP,
\fB\-portability\fP,
\fB\-pretty\fP,
\fB\-project\fP,
\fB\-source\fP,
\fB\-style\fP,
\fB\-truncation\fP,
\fB\-type\fP,
and
\fB\-usage\fP,
the list consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
If the list of keywords is omitted, the
effect is to set the option to its turn-on value (same as ``all'' in most
cases).
Also, if the
list is omitted, the setting name can be prefixed with \fBno\fP or
\fBno\-\fP to
turn off all the options it controls.  For example, \fB\-f77\fP turns
on all warnings about nonstandard constructions, while
\fB\-nof77\fP turns them all off.    Three special keywords are:
.TP
\fBhelp\fP
Print out all the option keywords controlled by the setting,
with a brief explanation of their meanings.
This keyword cannot be given in a list with other keywords.
.TP
\fBall\fP
Set all options. This turns on all options controlled by the setting.
.TP
\fBnone\fP
Clear all options.  This turns off all options controlled by the setting.
.PP
For example, \fB\-f77=help\fP gives a list of all the keywords
controlled by the \fB\-f77\fP option, \fB\-f77=all\fP turns them all
on, and \fB\-f77=all\fP turns them all off.
These three special keywords must be given in full.  For all other
keywords, only as many letters of the keyword as are necessary to
identify it unambiguously need be given, or a wildcard pattern
may be used.  Including a keyword in the
list turns the corresponding option on.
For example, \fB\-f77=intrinsic\fP would
turn on only the warnings about use of nonstandard intrinsic functions.
Prefixing a keyword by \fBno\-\fP turns its option off.
For example,
\fB\-pretty=no\-long\-line\fP turns off warnings about lines
exceeding 72 columns in length while leaving all other warnings about
misleading appearance in effect.
If a setting has default \fBnone\fP, you can turn on all options
except one or two by using \fBall\fP first.
For example,
\fB\-f77=all,no\-intrinsic\fP enables warnings about all nonstandard
extensions except intrinsic functions.
If a setting has default \fBall\fP, you can turn off all warnings
except one or two by using \fBnone\fP first.
For example,
\fB\-truncation=none,demotion\fP would turn off all precision related
warnings except about demotions.
Wildcard patterns contain an asterisk to stand for any string of
characters.  If a wildcard pattern is used, all the warnings that
match it are affected.  If \fBno\-\fP is prefixed to the pattern, all
the matching warnings are turned off, otherwise they are all turned
on.  The minimum unambiguous length rule does not apply to wildcard
matching.    For example, use \fB\-usage=no\-*var*\fP to turn off
all warnings relating to variable usage (both local and common).
(Unix users may need to
quote any options containing wildcards in order to prevent the shell
from attempting to expand them.)
Wildcards are recognized only in lists of warning keywords, not in the
top-level options themselves.
.PP
When \fBftnchek\fP starts up, it looks for environment variables
and also for a preferences file.
Any options defined in the environment or in the preferences file are
used as defaults in place of the built-in defaults.  They are
over-ridden by any command line options.
See the section on changing the defaults for details about the
environment options and the preferences file.
.PP
.ie \nh \{
.in 0
2 Files
.PP
When giving a name of an input file, the extension is optional.  If no
extension is given, \fBftnchek\fP will first look for a project file
with extension \fI.\|prj\fP, and will use that if it exists.  If not, then
\fBftnchek\fP will look for a Fortran source file
with the extension \fI.\|for\fP.
\}
.el \{
When giving a name of an input file, the extension is optional.  If no
extension is given, \fBftnchek\fP will first look for a project file
with extension \fI.\|prj\fP, and will use that if it exists.  If not, then
\fBftnchek\fP will look for a Fortran source file
with the extension \fI.\|for\fP for VMS systems, \fI.\|f\fP for UNIX systems.
\}
The default source format for files with extension \fI.\|for\fP or \fI.\|f\fP
is fixed format.  If the input file is in free format, use extension
\fI.\|f90\fP or \fI.\|f95\fP (or specify \fB\-source=free\fP on the
command line).
More than one file name can be given to \fBftnchek\fP,
and it will process the
program units in all files as if they were in a single file.
.PP
.ie \nh \{
Wildcards are allowed in the specification of filenames on the command
line.
\}
.el \{
Wildcards are allowed in the specification of filenames on the command
line for the VMS and MS-DOS versions,
as also of course under UNIX and any other system that performs
wildcard expansion in the command processor.
\}
.PP
If no filename is given, \fBftnchek\fP will read input from the
standard input.
.\" Omit sections "OPTIONS" thru "LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS" from blurb
.if !\nb \{
.ie \nh \{
.\" Begin HELP-only paragraph
.in 0
2 Options
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP options fall into two categories: switches, which are either
true or false, and settings, which have a numeric or string value.  The
name of a switch or
numeric setting can be preceded by 'no' to turn it off: e.g. /nocommon
would turn off the warnings about common block inconsistencies.  Only
the first 3
characters of an option name (not counting the '/') need be provided.
Most options are positional: each option remains in
effect from the point it is
encountered until it is overridden by a later change.
\}
.\" End HELP-only paragraph.  Begin non-HELP section
.el \{
.SH "OPTIONS"
This section provides a more detailed discussion of \fBftnchek\fP
command-line options.  Options and filenames may be interspersed on a
command line.  Most options are positional: each option remains in
effect from the point it is
encountered until it is overridden by a later change.  Thus for
example, the listing may be suppressed for some files and not for
others.  Exceptions are: the \fB\-intrinsic\fP, \fB\-pointersize\fP,
and \fB\-wordsize\fP settings, which cannot be
changed once processing of input files has started;
the
\fB\-arguments\fP,
\fB\-array\fP,
\fB\-calltree\fP,
\fB\-common\fP,
\fB\-crossref\fP,
\fB\-extern\fP,
\fB\-resources\fP,
and
\fB\-sort\fP
options, where the action depends only on the value of
the option after the processing of input files is finished;
and the \fB\-include\fP setting, which is cumulative.
.PP
The option names in the following list are in alphabetical order.
\}

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /arguments=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-arguments= list
.RS
\}
Controls warnings about
mismatches between actual and dummy subprogram arguments, and also
about mismatches between expected and actual subprogram type.  (An actual
argument is an argument passed to the subprogram by the caller; a
dummy argument is an argument received by the subprogram.)
By default, all warnings are turned on.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
Since all these warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about arguments, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-arguments\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-arguments=all\fP, and \fB\-noarguments\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-arguments=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBarrayness\fP:
warn about inconsistent use of arguments that are arrays.
These warnings can be further controlled by the \fB\-array\fP option.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBtype\fP:
warn about dummy arguments of a different data type from the actual arguments.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBfunction\-type\fP:
warn if the invocation assumes the function's return value is a
different type than it actually is.  Also warns if a function is
called as a subroutine, or vice-versa.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBnumber\fP:
warn about invoking a subprogram with a different number of arguments
than the subprogram expects.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP,  a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted: the \fIlist\fP is replaced by a
number from 0 to 3.  A value of 0 turns all the warnings off,
1 turns on only \fBnumber\fP, 2 turns on all
except \fBnumber\fP, and 3 turns all the warnings on.
.PP
This setting does not apply to checking invocations
of intrinsic functions or statement functions, which can
only be turned off by the \fB\-nocheck\fP option.
.PP
See also: \fB\-array\fP, \fB\-library\fP, \fB\-usage\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /array=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-array= list
.RS
\}
Controls the degree of strictness in checking
agreement between actual and dummy subprogram arguments that are arrays.
The warnings controlled by this setting are for constructions that might
legitimately be used by a knowledgeable programmer, but that often
indicate programming errors.
By default, all warnings are turned on.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
Since all these warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about array arguments, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-array\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-array=all\fP, and \fB\-noarray\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-array=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBdimensions\fP:
warn if the arguments differ in their number of dimensions,
or if the actual argument is an array element while the dummy argument
is a whole array.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBsize\fP:
warn if both arguments are arrays, but they differ in number
of elements.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP,  a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted: the \fIlist\fP is replaced by a
number from 0 to 3.  A value of 0 turns all the warnings off,
1 turns on only \fBdimensions\fP, 2 turns on only
\fBsize\fP, and 3 turns all the warnings on.
.PP
Note:
A warning is always given regardless of this setting if the actual
argument is an array while the dummy argument is a scalar variable, or
if the actual argument is a scalar variable or expression while the
dummy argument is an array.  These cases are seldom intentional.
(To turn off even these warnings, use \fB\-arguments=no\-arrayness\fP.)
No warning is ever given if the actual argument is an array
element while the dummy argument is a scalar variable.
Variable-dimensioned arrays and arrays dimensioned with 1 or asterisk match any
number of array elements.
There is no check of whether multi-dimensional arrays agree in the
size of each dimension separately.
.PP
See also:
\fB\-arguments\fP, \fB\-library\fP, \fB\-usage\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /brief
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-brief
.RS
\}
Selects a shorter format for some warning messages.  At present, the
only warnings controlled by this flag are those that are printed at
the end of processing each subprogram.  These include warnings about
variables that are set but not used or used before set, variable names
that do not conform to the Fortran 77 standard, etc.  (These warnings
may be suppressed entirely depending on other flags, such as the
\fB\-usage\fP or \fB\-f77\fP flags.)  In the default format each
variable is listed on a separate line, along with the line number
where the variable is declared, set or used, according to the nature
of the warning.  The briefer format simply lists all variables to
which the warning applies, with up to 4 variables per line.
.PP
See also: \fB\-quiet\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /calltree=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-calltree= list
.RS
\}
Causes \fBftnchek\fP to print out the call structure of
the complete program.
NOTE: at this time, this option is not working
correctly for programs containing or using module subprograms.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
There are two special keywords: \fBnone\fP to turn off all the
options, and
\fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.  (The keyword \fBall\fP turns on all the
options, but should not normally be used since only one format should
be specified.)
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-calltree\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-calltree=tree\fP, and \fB\-nocalltree\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-calltree=none\fP.
By default no call graph is printed.
.PP
If the \fB\-mkhtml\fP option is invoked \fIand\fP tree is the applied
calltree option, a file named \fCCallTree.html\fR, will also be produced
depicting the tree in HTML format.  This file is useful as a starting
point for browsing the HTML files describing each component of the
program.
.PP
The keywords which control which format is used are as follows:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBtree\fP:
produce the call graph in tree format.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBreference\fP:
produce the call graph in who-calls-who format.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBvcg\fP:
produce the call graph in VCG format.
.PP
Only one of the formats \fBtree\fP, \fBreference\fP, or \fBvcg\fP may
be specified.
.PP
The following keywords control options affecting the output:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBprune\fP:
prune repeated subtrees (applicable only with \fBtree\fP).  This
the default.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBsort\fP:
sort children of each routine into alphabetical order.  This is the default.
.PP
For \fBtree\fP format, the call graph is printed out
starting from the main program, which is listed on the first line at
the left margin.  Then on the following lines, each routine called by
the main program is listed, indented a few spaces, followed by the
subtree starting at that routine.
.PP
In the default mode,
if a routine is called by more than one other routine,
its call subtree is printed only the first time it is encountered.
Later calls give only the routine name and the notice ``(see above)''.
To have the subtree printed for each occurrence of the routine,
use option \fBno\-prune\fP.
.PP
Note that the call tree will be incomplete if any of the input files
are project files containing more than one program unit
that were created in \fB\-library\fP mode.  See the
discussion of project files below.
.PP
Technical points: Each list of routines called by a given routine is
printed in alphabetical order unless the \fBno\-sort\fP option is given.
If multiple main programs are found, the call tree of each is printed
separately.
If no main program is found, a report to that effect is printed out,
and the call trees of any top-level non-library routines are printed.
See the discussion
of the \fB\-library\fP flag.
.PP
For \fBreference\fP format a who-calls-who table is printed.
This table lists each subprogram followed by a list of the
routines it calls.
.PP
The reference list omits routines
called by unused library program units.  Thus it contains the same
information as for the call-tree format, namely the hierarchy of
subprogram calls, but printed in a different way.  This prints out
a breadth-first traversal of the call tree whereas \fB\-calltree=tree\fP prints
out a depth-first traversal.
.PP
For \fBvcg\fP format the call tree is produced
in the form of a VCG graph description.  This
description is written to a separate file, with the same stem as the
file containing the main program, and suffix
.IR .vcg .
This file is able to be given directly to
.BR xvcg (1L)
to visualize the call graph.
(If input is from the standard input, then the graph description is
sent to standard output.)
.PP
The VCG description as created is more complex than it need be. VCG allows
graphs and nested subgraphs: each subroutine is created as a
subgraph nested inside its calling routines.  This allows you to
interactively display subgraphs or summarise them.
.PP
The
.B \-calltree=vcg
option for
.B ftnchek
was written by Dr. Philip Rubini of Cranfield University, UK.
.PP
\fBxvcg\fP(1L) is a graph visualisation tool which runs under the X windows system.
It is freely available from ftp.cs.uni\-sb.de. It was written by G. Sander
of the University of Saarland, Germany.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP,  a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted: the \fIlist\fP is replaced by a
number from 0 to 15.  This number is formed from 1 for
\fBtree\fP format, 2 for \fBreference\fP format, or 3 for \fBvcg\fP
format, plus 4 for \fBno\-prune\fP, and 8 for \fBno\-sort\fP.
.PP
See also:
\fB\-crossref\fP, \fB\-library\fP, \fB\-sort\fP,
\fB\-symtab\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /check
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-check
.RS
\}
This switch is provided so that errors and warning messages can be
turned off when \fBftnchek\fP is used for purposes other than finding
bugs, such as making declarations or printing the call tree.  It is
positional, so after turning all checks off, selected checks can be
turned back on.  The effect of \fB\-nocheck\fP is to put all switches,
numeric settings, and settings controlling lists of warnings
to their turn-off values, as if they had all been
specified with the \-no prefix.
NOTE: in \fBftnchek\fP version 4, many new warnings were introduced,
and some may not have been put under the control of this switch.  We
are working on this.
.PP
Switches and settings that specify
options and modes of operation, rather than controlling warnings, are
unaffected.
These are
\fB\-calltree\fP,
\fB\-columns\fP, \fB\-crossref\fP,
\fB\-include\fP, \fB\-intrinsic\fP,
\fB\-library\fP, \fB\-list\fP,
\fB\-makedcls\fP,
\fB\-module\fP,
\fB\-novice\fP,
\fB\-output\fP,
\fB\-pointersize\fP, \fB\-project\fP,
\fB\-quiet\fP,
\fB\-resources\fP,
\fB\-sort\fP, \fB\-source\fP, \fB\-symtab\fP,
\fB\-version\fP,
\fB\-wordsize\fP,
and
\fB\-wrap\fP.
Default = yes.
.PP
Parse errors (syntax errors due to unrecognized or malformed
statements) are not suppressed by this switch, since the results may
be incorrect if \fBftnchek\fP has not parsed the program correctly.
.PP
There are some miscellaneous errors and warning messages that are not
controlled by any other switch, and so can be turned off only by this
switch.  Note that using \fB\-check\fP following \fB\-nocheck\fP only
has the effect of turning these special warnings back on, and does not
restore all the checks it turned off.  These warnings include:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
o
Program unit contains no executable statements.
.TP
o
In free source form, missing space where space is required
(e.g. between a keyword and an identifier) or space
present where none is allowed (e.g. within an identifier).
.TP
o
Zero or negative length specification in a data type declaration of the
form type*len.
.TP
o
Invalid operand(s) in an expression.
.TP
o
Array assigned to scalar.
.TP
o
Type mismatch between DO index and bounds.
.TP
o
Undefined common block declared in SAVE statement.
.TP
o
Intrinsic function explicitly declared with an incompatible type.
.TP
o
Unknown intrinsic function explicitly declared in an
INTRINSIC statement.
.TP
o
Intrinsic function passed as a subprogram argument is not declared
in an INTRINSIC statement.
.TP
o
Intrinsic function or statement function invoked incorrectly.
.TP
o
Function does not set return value prior to RETURN statement.
.TP
o
Parameter constant value not evaluated (this is \fBftnchek\fP's fault,
and it is just informing you of the fact).
.TP
o
Entry point of a subprogram is later used as a different subprogram's
name.
.TP
o
Unknown keyword used in an I/O statement.
.TP
o
Illegal label reference (e.g. GOTO refers to a non-executable
statement; I/O statement refers to a non-format statement).
.PP
See also: \fB\-errors\fP.
.RE


.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /columns=num
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-columns= num
.RS
\}
Set maximum fixed-form statement line length to \fInum\fP columns.
(Beyond this is ignored.)
This setting is provided to allow checking of programs which may
violate the Fortran standard limit of 72 columns for the length of a
statement line in fixed source format.  According to
the standard, all characters past column 72 are ignored.
If this setting is used when the \fB\-f77=long\-line\fP option is in effect, a
warning will be given for any lines in which characters past column 72
are processed.
Turn-on = max = 132.  Default = 72.
.PP
This setting does not suppress warnings about the presence of
characters beyond column 72.
To process code with meaningful program text beyond column 72, use
this setting and be sure the \fB\-f77\fP \fBlong\-line\fP option is off.
To process code with sequence numbers in columns 73 to 80, leave the
the columns setting at the default value and use the
\fB\-pretty=no\-long\-line\fP flag.
.PP
This setting has no effect when processing a source file in free
format.  The free-form statement line length limit of 132 columns cannot be
changed in \fBftnchek\fP.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-pretty\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /common=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-common= list
.RS
\}
This setting controls the strictness of
checking of COMMON blocks.
By default, all warnings except \fBname\fP and \fBvolatile\fP are turned on.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
Since most of these warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-common\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-common=all\fP,
and \fB\-nocommon\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-common=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBdimensions\fP:
corresponding arrays in each declaration of a block must
agree in size and number of dimensions.  This option only has an effect
when used together with \fBexact\fP.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBexact\fP:
the comparison of two blocks is done variable-by-variable rather than
simply requiring agreement between corresponding storage locations.
Use this if all declarations of a given COMMON block are supposed to be
identical, which is a good programming practice.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBlength\fP:
warn if different declarations of the same block are not equal in
total length.
The Fortran 77 Standard requires each named common block, but not
blank common, to be
the same length in all program units of the program.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBname\fP:
warn if corresponding variables in different declarations of the same
block differ in name (ignoring variations of case).
This option only has an effect when used together with \fBexact\fP.
It can be useful when porting old code to Fortran 90, putting variable
declarations into modules, when it becomes essential that
all subprograms use the same names for corresponding variables.
To prevent cascades, this warning is only given for one pair of
declarations of a given block per run.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBtype\fP:
in each declaration of a given COMMON block,
corresponding memory locations (words or bytes) must agree in data type.
If used together with \fBexact\fP, this will require that
corresponding variables agree in data type.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
\fBvolatile\fP:
Assume that COMMON blocks are volatile.
.PP
Many Fortran programmers assume that variables, whether
local or in COMMON, are static, i.e. that
once assigned a value, they retain that value permanently until
assigned a different value by the program.  However, in fact the
Fortran 77 Standard does not require this to be the case.
Local variables may
become undefined between activations of a subprogram in which they are
declared.  Similarly, named COMMON blocks may become undefined if no subprogram
in which they are declared is active.  (The technical term for
entities with this behavior is ``automatic'',
but \fBftnchek\fP uses the word ``volatile'' since it
is clearer to the nonspecialist.)  Only blank (unnamed) COMMON and
COMMON blocks declared
in a SAVE statement, or
declared in the main program or in a block data subprogram remain
defined as long as the program is running.  Variables and COMMON
blocks that can become undefined at some point are called volatile.
.PP
If the \fB\-common=volatile\fP flag is turned on,
\fBftnchek\fP will warn you if it finds
a volatile COMMON block.  If, at the same time, the
\fB\-usage=com\-block\-volatile \fP option is turned on (which is the default),
\fBftnchek\fP will try to check whether
such a block can lose its defined status between activations of the
subprogram where it is declared.  \fBftnchek\fP does not do a very good job of
this: the rule used is to see whether the block is declared in two
separated subtrees of the call tree.  For instance, this would be the
case if two program units, both called from the main program, shared a
volatile COMMON block.  A block can also become undefined between two
successive calls of the same subprogram, but \fBftnchek\fP is not smart
enough to tell whether a subprogram can be called more than once, so
this case is not checked for.
.PP
The \fB\-common=volatile\fP flag does not affect the way \fBftnchek\fP
checks the usage of local variables.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP,  a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted: the \fIlist\fP is replaced by a
number from 0 to 3.  A value of 0 turns all the warnings off,
1 or greater turns on \fBtype\fP, 2 or greater turns on \fBlength\fP, and
3 turns on \fBdimensions\fP and \fBexact\fP also.  The numeric form
cannot turn on the \fBvolatile\fP option.
.PP
See also: \fB\-library\fP, \fB\-usage\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /crossref=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-crossref= list
.RS
\}
Prints cross-reference tables.  Default = none.
NOTE: at this time, this option is not working
correctly for module subprograms.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
The keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBcalls\fP:
table lists each subprogram followed by a list of routines that call
it.  This listing omits library program units that are not in the call tree
of the main program.  The list is alphabetized.
.TP
\fBcommon\fP:
table lists each COMMON block followed by a list of the routines that
access it.  These listed routines are those in which some variables in
the COMMON block are accessed, not simply those routines that declare
the block.  (To find out what routines declare a COMMON block but do
not use it, see the \fB\-usage\fP flag.)
.TP 
\fBlabels\fP:
table lists each label followed by a list of all references to it.  A
label reference is denoted by the line number and statement type of
the referring statement.   The label list is in sequential order.  The
references are listed in the order they are encountered in the program.
.PP
See also: \fB\-calltree\fP, \fB\-sort\fP,
\fB\-symtab\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /declare
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-declare
.RS
\}
If this flag is set, all identifiers whose datatype is
not declared in each program unit will be listed.  This flag is useful for
helping to find misspelled variable names, etc.  The same listing will
be given if the program unit contains an IMPLICIT NONE statement.
Default = no.
.PP
See also: \fB\-sixchar\fP, \fB\-usage\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /division
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-division
.RS
\}
This switch is provided to help users spot potential
division by zero problems.  If this switch is selected, every division
except by a constant will be flagged.  (It is assumed that the user is
intelligent enough not to divide by a constant which is equal to zero!)
Default = no.
.PP
See also: \fB\-portability\fP, \fB\-truncation\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /errors=num
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-errors= num
.RS
\}
Set the maximum number of error messages in a ``cascade''.
During checking of agreement of subprogram
arguments, common block declarations, and so forth, sometimes a single
case will generate a long string of warnings.  Often this simply
indicates some other cause than a genuine item-by-item mismatch, such
as for
example a variable missing from one list.  So in such cases
\fBftnchek\fP stops printing the warnings after the cascade limit is
reached, and the trailer ``\fCetc...\fR'' is printed to indicate that there
were more errors not printed.  If you think that these warnings are
likely to be genuine, use this setting to see more of them.
Turn-on = default = 3, max = 999.  A value of 0 means no limit.
.PP
This setting does not set an overall limit on the number of error
messages printed, only the number printed in any one cascade.  Most
types of warnings and error messages are not subject to the cascade
effect and so are not affected by this setting.  To turn off warnings
generally, use the individual warning control options or the
\fB\-nocheck\fP option.
.PP
See also: \fB\-check\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /extern
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-extern
.RS
\}
Causes \fBftnchek\fP to report whether any subprograms
invoked by the program are never defined.
Ordinarily, if \fBftnchek\fP is being run on a complete program, each
subprogram other than the intrinsic functions should be defined
somewhere.  Turn off this switch if you just want to
check a subset of files which form part of a larger complete program.
Subprogram arguments will still be
checked for correctness.  Default = yes.
.PP
The \fB\-extern\fP flag is now superseded by the
\fB\-usage=ext\-undefined\fP option.  For the sake of convenience, the
\fB\-extern\fP flag is retained, so that \fB\-noextern\fP is
equivalent to \fB\-usage=no\-ext\-undefined\fP option.  The
\fB\-extern\fP switch may be retired eventually.
.PP
See also: \fB\-library\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /f77=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-f77= list
.RS
\}
Use this setting to catch language extensions which violate
the Fortran 77 Standard.  Such extensions may cause your program not
to be portable.  Examples include the use of underscores in variable
names; variable names longer than six characters; statement lines
longer than 72 characters; and nonstandard statements such as the
DO ... ENDDO structure.  \fBftnchek\fP does not report on
the use of lowercase letters.
By default, all warnings are turned off.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
vendor extensions to the Fortran 77 Standard that are accepted
by \fBftnchek\fP but were not
adopted in Fortran 90.  It also provides control over warnings about
syntax features that were introduced in Fortran 90.
.if !\nh \{
(Further details about the extensions themselves are given below in the
section on Extensions.)
\}
The \fIlist\fP
consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about nonstandard extensions, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-f77\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f77=all\fP, and \fB\-nof77\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f77=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBaccept\-type\fP:
ACCEPT and TYPE I/O statements.
.TP
\fBbackslash\fP:
Unix backslash escape in strings.  This warning will be given only if
the \fB\-source=unix\-backslash\fP setting is specified to cause
the escape interpretation of backslash..
.TP
\fBbyte\fP:
BYTE data type declaration.
.TP
\fBcommon\-subprog\-name\fP:
Common block and subprogram having the same name.
.TP
\fBcontinuation\fP:
More than 19 successive continuation lines.
.TP
\fBcpp\fP:
Unix C preprocessor directives in the source code.
.TP
\fBcray\-pointer\fP:
``Cray pointer'' syntax.
.TP
\fBd\-comment\fP:
Debugging comments starting with \fCD\fR in the source code.
.TP
\fBdec\-tab\fP:
DEC Fortran style tab-formatted source code.  This warning will be
given only if the \fB\-source=dec\-tab\fP setting is specified to cause
interpretation of tabs in this style.
.TP
\fBdouble\-complex\fP:
Double precision complex datatype.
.TP
\fBf90\fP:
Any non-Fortran 77 syntax features that are standard Fortran 90.
There is no provision for controlling warnings about these features
individually, because there are so many.  NOTE: since support for full
Fortran 90 has only recently been added, our attention was focused on
implementing support for the new syntax.  Warnings under this option
for some features may not have been added yet, so 
Fortran 77 standard conformance checking is incomplete at this time.
We will tighten it up as time permits.  Also, no warning is given
about the use of lowercase characters.
.TP
\fBformat\-dollarsign\fP:
Dollar sign control code in FORMAT statements.
.TP
\fBformat\-edit\-descr\fP:
Nonstandard edit descriptors in FORMAT statements.
.TP
\fBfunction\-noparen\fP:
Function definition without parentheses.
.TP
\fBinitializer\fP:
Nonstandard initializer that mixes type declaration with an
initialization using DATA-statement syntax, e.g.
\fCINTEGER N / 10 /\fR.
Warnings about Fortran 90 standard initializers, e.g. \fCINTEGER:: N=10\fR are
controlled by \fB\-f77=f90\fP.
.TP
\fBinternal\-namelist\-io\fP:
Namelist-directed I/O to or from an internal file.
List-directed I/O (format \fC*\fP) is also nonstandard, but it is
permitted in Fortran 90, so the warning about it is controlled
by \fB\-f77=f90\fP.
.TP
\fBintrinsic\fP:
Nonstandard intrinsic functions that were not adopted in Fortran 90.
.TP
\fBio\-keywords\fP:
Nonstandard keywords used in I/O statements.  These fall into three
groups.  The first group includes keywords that are accepted in
Fortran 90:
.TS
center;
l l l.
ACTION	PAD	READWRITE
ADVANCE	POSITION	SIZE
DELIM	READ	WRITE
EOR
.TE
The second group comprises the following VMS Fortran keywords:
.TS
center;
l l l.
BLOCKSIZE	EXTENDSIZE	READONLY
BUFFERCOUNT	INITIALSIZE	RECORDSIZE
CARRIAGECONTROL	MAXREC	RECORDTYPE
DEFAULTFILE	NAME (in OPEN)	SHARED
DISP	NOSPANBLOCK	TYPE
DISPOSE	ORGANIZATION
.TE
(The keyword NAME is standard only in the INQUIRE
statement.)
The third group consists of the following IBM/MVS keyword:
.TS
center;
l l l.
NUM
.TE
Warnings about the first group are controlled by \fB\-f77=f90\fP,
not this flag.
This flag also controls a warning about use of ACCESS='APPEND',
which is accepted by some compilers.  The value of 'APPEND' is
not valid for any I/O specifier in standard Fortran 77, and in Fortran
90 'APPEND' should be used as a value of the POSITION
specifier, not  ACCESS.
.TP
\fBlong\-line\fP:
Statements in fixed form with meaningful code past 72 columns.  This warning is
given only if the \fB\-columns\fP setting has been used to increase
the statement field width.
.TP
\fBmixed\-expr\fP:
Nonstandard type combinations in expressions, for example DOUBLE
PRECISION with COMPLEX, assigning hollerith to integer,
logical operations on integers.
.TP
\fBname\-dollarsign\fP:
Dollar sign or other nonstandard character used as a character in identifiers.
.TP
\fBparam\-implicit\-type\fP:
Implicit typing of a parameter by the data type of the value assigned.
This warning can only occur if implicit parameter typing has been
turned on by the \fB\-source=param\-implicit\-type\fP option, or
if the PARAMETER statement is of the nonstandard form without
parentheses.  If this option is turned on,
then any instances where implicit parameter typing occurs will be
warned about.
If you want to be warned only in those instances
where the implicit data type differs from the default type, use
\fB\-portability=param\-implicit\-type\fP instead.  According to the Fortran
77 standard, the data type of a parameter is given by the same rules
as for a variable, and if necessary a type conversion is done when the
value is assigned.
.TP
\fBparam\-intrinsic\fP:
Intrinsic function or exponentiation by a real used to define the value
of a PARAMETER definition.  Note that in Fortran 90 the
restriction on intrinsic functions has been relaxed somewhat, while the
restriction on exponentiation remains.  In a future release we plan to
provide a flag that will separate control over these two categories of
warnings.
.TP
\fBparam\-noparen\fP:
PARAMETER statement without parentheses.  The user should be
aware that the semantics of this form of the statement differs from
that of the standard form: in this form, the parameter takes its data
type from the value assigned, rather than having its default data type
based on the first letter of the parameter name.  (This form of the
PARAMETER statement was introduced by DEC before the Fortran 77
standard was defined, and should be avoided.)
.TP
\fBquad\-constant\fP:
Quad precision real constants, e.g. of the form \fC1.23Q4\fR.
.TP
\fBstatement\-order\fP:
Statements out of the sequence mandated by the Standard.  The allowed
sequence is illustrated in Table 1 in the section on Interpreting the
Output.
.TP
\fBtypeless\-constant\fP:
Typeless constants, for example \fCZ'19AF'\fR.  Constants of this form
are now acceptable in Fortran 90, provided the initial letter is
\fCB\fP, \fCO\fP, or \fCZ\fP.  Some vendor versions of Fortran
allow constants with the initial letter \fCX\fP, or with the letter at
the end of the string instead of the beginning.  This option controls
warnings only about the forms that are not standard Fortran 90.  For
warnings about the others, use \fB\-f77=f90\fP.
.IP
This flag also controls warnings if the constants have Fortran 90
standard forms but are used outside of a DATA statement.
.TP
\fBtype\-size\fP:
Type declarations specifying a size, for example \fCREAL*8\fR.
.TP
\fBvariable\-format\fP:
Variable repeat specification or field size in FORMAT.  These
are of the form \fC<\fR \fIexpr\fP \fC>\fR.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f90\fP, \fB\-f95\fP, \fB\-portability\fP,
\fB\-pretty\fP, \fB\-style\fP, \fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /f90=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-f90= list
.RS
\}
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
supported extensions to the Fortran 77 Standard that were not adopted
as part of the Fortran 90 Standard.  Note that \fBftnchek\fP does not
support the full Fortran 90 language.  However, it does support some
common extensions to Fortran 77 that were prevalent before Fortran 90
was defined.  Some of these extensions became part of the Fortran 90
Standard, but others did not.  The \fB\-f90\fP setting warns only
about the latter.  That is, this flag covers things that are neither legal
Fortran 77 nor legal Fortran 90.  Therefore, the warnings controlled
by this flag are basically a subset of the warnings controlled by
\fB\-f77\fP.  There are a few cases, described below, where the
circumstances in which the warning is given are slightly different for
the two flags.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP
consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about nonstandard extensions, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-f90\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f90=all\fP, and \fB\-nof90\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f90=none\fP.
.PP
The option keywords for this setting are the same as for \fB\-f77\fP, excepting
\fBf90\fP and \fBparam\-intrinsic\fP.  (An option for checking F90
parameter declarations is in the works.)
Most keywords have identical meanings for \fB\-f90\fP as for
\fB\-f77\fP.  Refer to the explanations under \fB\-f77\fP.
.PP
The keywords which differ somewhat from the corresponding
\fB\-f77\fP keywords are as follows.
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBcontinuation\fP:
The limit on the number of continuation lines for a statement in
fixed source form is the
same, namely 19, in Fortran 90 as in Fortran 77.  For free
source form the limit is 39 continuation lines, and a line containing
a continuation mark cannot be otherwise empty or contain only a comment.
.TP
\fBintrinsic\fP:
This is the same as for \fB\-f77\fP except for the intrinsic
functions defined in MIL-STD 1753, which are all included in Fortran
90, and so are not warned about.  (See \fB\-intrinsic\fP for a list.)
.TP
\fBlong\-line\fP:
Although the Fortran 90 Standard allows lines longer than 72
characters in free source form, this restriction still applies to fixed
source form.  In free source form the line length limit is 132 characters,
and unlike fixed form, \fBftnchek\fP does not allow this limit to
be increased.
.TP
\fBmixed\-expr\fP:
This is the same as for \fB\-f77\fP except for expressions mixing
extended precision real with complex data types, which are permitted
in Fortran 90.
.TP
\fBstatement\-order\fP:
This is similar to the corresponding \fB\-f77\fP warning, but applies
the somewhat looser restrictions on statement order of the
Fortran 90 Standard.  In particular, Fortran 90 allows DATA
statements and statement-function definitions to be intermixed with
specification statements.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-f95\fP, \fB\-portability\fP,
\fB\-pretty\fP, \fB\-style\fP, \fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /f95=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-f95= list
.RS
\}
This setting provides detailed control over warnings about standard Fortran 77
features that were deleted from the Fortran 95 Standard.  Unlike the
\fB\-f77\fP and \fB\-f90\fP settings, these warnings apply to syntax
which is legal Fortran 77.  However, since these features have been deleted
from the Standard, it is possible that programs containing
them will be unacceptable to some newer compilers.
.PP
Note that this setting does \fInot\fP specify checking conformance to
the Fortran 95 standard, other than checking for these deleted
features.  In future we plan to provide standard conformance checking
for Fortran 95.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP
consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about nonstandard extensions, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-f95\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f95=all\fP, and \fB\-nof95\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-f95=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows.
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBreal\-do\fP:
A DO variable of any real numeric type.
.TP
\fBpause\fP:
The PAUSE statement.
.TP
\fBassign\fP:
The ASSIGN statement, assigned GOTO, or assigned format.
.TP
\fBh\-edit\fP:
The H edit descriptor in a format.
.PP
There is one other Fortran 77 syntax feature that was deleted in
Fortran 95, namely  branching to an ENDIF from outside the
IF block.  However, \fBftnchek\fP is unable to analyze program
flow, and so it does not provide a warning for this.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-f90\fP, \fB\-portability\fP,
\fB\-pretty\fP, \fB\-style\fP, \fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /help
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-help
.RS
\}
Prints a list of all the command-line options with a
short description of each along with its default value.
This command is identical in function to
the \fB``?''\fP
argument.  Default = no.
.PP
The help listing also prints the version number and patch level of
\fBftnchek\fP and a copyright notice.
.PP
Note: the ``default'' values printed in square brackets in the help listing
are, strictly speaking, not the built-in defaults but the current
values after any environment options and any command-line
options in a preferences file or preceding the \fB\-help\fP option have been processed.
.PP
See also: \fB\-novice\fP, \fB\-version\fP, and \fIsetting\fP=\fBhelp\fP option of
all settings that take a list of keywords.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /identifier-chars=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-identifier\-chars= list
.RS
\}
Define non-standard characters that may be used in identifiers.
According to the Fortran 90 standard, identifiers may contain only
alphanumeric characters or the underscore.
By default, \fBftnchek\fP also accepts the dollar sign as a 
character in identifier names.
The characters in
the \fIlist\fP replace whatever set of accepted non-standard characters
was previously in effect.  Thus, if dollar sign is not
included in the list, it loses its status as an acceptable character.
.PP
The purpose of this option is to enable \fBftnchek\fP to correctly parse source files
containing non-standard identifier names that may be needed, for
example, to access certain operating system services.  See the section
on Limitations and Extensions for the treatment of identifiers
containing these characters in implicit typing.
Warnings about use of these non-standard characters will still be
given if the \fB\-f77=name\-dollarsign\fR or
\fB\-f90=name\-dollarsign\fR option is given.
.PP
Using \fB\-noidentifer\-chars\fP turns off acceptance of
non-standard characters entirely.
.PP
See also: \fB\-source\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /include=path
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-include= path
.RS
\}
Specifies a directory to be searched for files
specified by INCLUDE statements.  Unlike other command-line
options, this setting is cumulative; that is, if it is given more than
once on the command line, all the directories so specified are placed
on a list that will be searched in the same order as they are given.
The order in which \fBftnchek\fP searches for a file to be included is:
the current source-file directory; the directory specified by
environment
variable \fCFTNCHEK_INCLUDE\fR if any;
the directories specified by any \fB\-include\fP options;
the directory specified by environment variable \fCINCLUDE\fR;
and finally in
a standard system-wide directory
(\fC/usr/include\fR for UNIX, \fCSYS$LIBRARY\fR for VMS,
and \fC\\include\fR
for MSDOS).
.PP
When a USE statement is encountered, if the module it references
is not found in the source-file directory or the directory specified
with \fB\-module\fP, then the above list of locations is also
searched.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-module\fP, \fB\-source\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /intrinsic=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-intrinsic= list
.RS
\}
Controls whether \fBftnchek\fP recognizes certain nonstandard
intrinsic functions as intrinsic.
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.  Some of the keywords control whether
to recognize certain groups of functions, and other keywords
control the expected syntax for invoking
some nonstandard intrinsics.
Include a keyword to turn on recognition of the corresponding
set of intrinsics or to allow the corresponding syntax.  Include a
keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off that recognition.
.PP
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP  turns on recognition of
all the nonstandard intrinsics (listed below) and accepts either syntax for
those that have variations.
Use \fBnone\fP to turn off recognition of all nonstandard intrinsics
except those noted below.
Use \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-intrinsic\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-intrinsic=all\fP, and \fB\-nointrinsic\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-intrinsic=none\fP.
.PP
The nonstandard intrinsic functions needed to support the nonstandard
extended precision data types (double complex and quad precision) are
always recognized.  The intrinsics for the double complex data type are:
.TS
center;
l l l l.
CDABS	CDSQRT	DREAL	ZLOG
CDCOS	DCMPLX	IMAG	ZSIN
CDEXP	DCONJG	ZABS	ZSQRT
CDLOG	DIMAG	ZEXP	ZCOS
CDSIN
.TE
An intrinsic for converting integer directly to double precision is:
.TS
center;
l.
DFLOAT
.TE
The intrinsics for the quad precision and quad complex types are:
.TS
center;
l l l l.
CQABS	QARCOS	QEXT	QNINT
CQCOS	QARSIN	QEXTD	QPROD
CQEXP	QATAN	QFLOAT	QREAL
CQLOG	QATAN2	QIMAG	QSIGN
CQSIN	QCMPLX	QINT	QSIN
CQSQRT	QCONJG	QLOG	QSINH
DBLEQ	QCOS	QLOG10	QSQRT
IQINT	QCOSH	QMAX1	QTAN
IQNINT	QDIM	QMIN1	QTANH
QABS	QEXP	QMOD	SNGLQ
.TE
The keywords controlling recognition of other nonstandard intrinsic
functions are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBextra\fP:
recognize the following commonly available nonstandard intrinsics
.TS
center;
l l.
EXIT	LOC
.TE
.TP
\fBunix\fP:
recognize these common Unix-specific intrinsic functions:
.TS
center;
l l l l.
ABORT	GMTIME	LTIME	SRAND
AND	IARGC	OR	SYSTEM
GETARG	IRAND	RAND	TIME
GETENV	LSHIFT	RSHIFT	XOR
.TE
.TP
\fBvms\fP:
recognize these common VMS-specific intrinsic functions:
.TS
center;
l l l l.
DATE	IDATE	SECNDS	TIME
ERRSNS	RAN	SIZEOF
.TE
.TP
\fBiargc\-no\-argument\fP:
specify that IARGC may be invoked with no arguments.
.TP
\fBiargc\-one\-argument\fP:
specify that IARGC may be invoked with one argument.
.TP
\fBrand\-no\-argument\fP:
specify that RAND and IRAND may be invoked with no
arguments.
.TP
\fBrand\-one\-argument\fP:
specify that RAND and IRAND may be invoked with one
argument.
.PP
The \fBno\-argument\fP and \fBone\-argument\fP keywords work as
follows: turning the option on causes \fBftnchek\fP to accept the
corresponding syntax for invocation of the function, without excluding
the possibility of the alternative syntax.  Turning the option off
causes the corresponding syntax not to be accepted.  If both options
are turned on at once (the default), then either syntax is accepted.
Turning both options off at once would not be meaningful.
These options have no effect if recognition of Unix intrinsics has
been turned off.
.PP
Note that this setting does not control whether non-standard warnings
are issued about these functions.  It controls whether the
functions are assumed to be intrinsic or not, which determines how their
usage is checked.  When functions in any of these sets are
included, their invocations will be checked according to the rules
for the intrinsic functions; otherwise they will be checked as normal
(user-written) external functions.  The non-standard warnings
are controlled by the \fB\-f77=intrinsic\fP and \fB\-f77=intrinsic\fP options.
.PP
The default value of this setting is equivalent to
.ie \nh \{
/intrinsic=all,no-unix.
\}
.el \{
\fB\-intrinsic=all\fP followed by \fB\-intrinsic=no\-vms\fP for the
Unix version, \fB\-intrinsic=no\-unix\fP for the VMS version,
and \fB\-intrinsic=no\-unix,no\-vms\fP for other versions.
\}
.PP
Note: In versions of \fBftnchek\fP prior to 2.10, the
\fB\-intrinsic\fP flag took a numeric argument instead of a list of
options.
For the sake of users who may have written scripts invoking
\fBftnchek\fP in this way, the numeric form is still
accepted.  The numeric form of the setting consists of three digits.
The
ones digit selects the set of intrinsic functions to be supported.
The digit 0 selects only Fortran 77 standard intrinsics plus those needed to
support the nonstandard extended precision data types.  The digit 1 is
equivalent to \fBextra\fP, 2 is
equivalent to \fBextra,unix\fP, and 3 is equivalent to
\fBextra,vms\fP.
The tens digit of this setting controls the syntax of the RAND
intrinsic function, and the hundreds
digit controls the syntax of the IARGC function.
For these digits,
specify 0 to require invocation with no argument,
1 to require one argument, and 2 to allow either form.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /library
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-library
.RS
\}
This switch is used when a number of subprograms are
contained in a file, but not all of them are used by the application.
Normally, \fBftnchek\fP warns you if any subprograms are defined but
never used.  This switch will suppress these warnings.  Default = no.
.PP
This switch also controls which subprogram calls and COMMON
block declarations are checked.  If a file
is read with the \fB\-library\fP flag in effect, the subprogram calls
and COMMON declarations contained in a routine in that file will
be checked only if that routine is in the main program's call tree.
On the other hand, if the \fB\-library\fP switch is
turned off, then \fBftnchek\fP checks the calls of every routine by
every other routine, regardless of whether those routines could ever
actually be invoked at run time, and likewise all COMMON block
declarations are compared for agreement.
.PP
The difference between this switch and the \fB\-usage=no\-ext\-unused\fP
option for subprograms is that the latter suppresses only the warning
about routines being declared but not used.  The \fB\-library\fP switch
goes further and excludes unused routines processed while it is in
effect from all cross-checking of arguments and COMMON block
declarations as well.
.PP
(If there is no main program anywhere in the set of files that
\fBftnchek\fP has read, so that there is no call tree, then
\fBftnchek\fP will look for any non-library routines that are not called
by any other routine, and use these as substitutes for the main
program in constructing the call tree and deciding what to check.
If no such top-level non-library routines are found, then
all inter-subprogram calls and all COMMON declarations will be checked.)
.PP
See also: \fB\-arguments\fP, \fB\-calltree\fP, \fB\-common\fP,
\fB\-extern\fP, \fB\-usage\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-list
.RS
\}
Specifies that a listing of the Fortran program is to be
printed out with line numbers.  If \fBftnchek\fP detects an error, the
error message follows the program line with a caret
( ^ )
specifying the location of the error.  If no source listing was
requested, \fBftnchek\fP will still print out any line containing an
error, to aid the user in determining where the error occurred.
Default = no.
.PP
See also: \fB\-output\fP, \fB\-symtab\fP, \fB\-quiet\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /makedcls=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-makedcls= list
.RS
\}
Prepare a neatly-formatted file of declarations of variables,
common blocks, and namelist lists, for possible
merging into the source code.  The declarations are stored in a file
of the same name as the source code, but with the extension changed to
.IR .dcl .
If no declarations are written to the file, it is deleted to reduce
clutter from empty files.
.PP
NOTE: this feature has not been tested on source files containing
modules.  It may not work as expected.
.PP
If input comes from standard input, instead of a named file, then
declarations are written to standard output.
.PP
Variables are declared in alphabetical order within each declaration
class and type, with integer variables first, because of their later
possible use in array dimensions.
.PP
PARAMETER statements are an exception to the alphabetical order
rule, because the Fortran 77 Standard requires that the expressions
defining parameter values refer only to constants and already-defined
parameter names.  This forces the original source file order of such
statements to be preserved in the declaration files.
.PP
Explicit declaration of
.I all
variables is considered good modern programming practice.  By using
compiler options to reject undeclared variables, misspelled variable
names (or names extending past column 72) can be caught at compile
time.  Explicit declarations also greatly facilitate changing
floating-point precision with filters such as
.BR dtoq (1L),
.BR dtos (1L),
.BR fd2s (1L),
.BR fs2d (1L),
.BR qtod (1L),
and
.BR stod (1L).
These programs are capable of changing types of explicit
floating-point type declarations, intrinsic functions, and constants,
but because they do not carry out rigorous lexical and grammatical
analysis of the Fortran source code, they cannot provide modified type
declarations for undeclared variables.
Default setting = 0, turn-on = 1.
.PP
Various options for the form of the declarations file are controlled
by the \fIlist\fP, which consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
options, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-makedcls\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-makedcls=declarations\fP (i.e. produce the declarations file
using the default options), and
\fB\-nomakedcls\fP is equivalent to \fB\-makedcls=none\fP.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP, a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted:  the \fIlist\fP is replaced by
a number which is the sum of the numbers in parentheses beside
the keywords in the following list.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBdeclarations\fR (1):
Write a declaration file.  (This is implied by any of the other
options, and can be omitted if any other options are given.)
.TP
\fBundeclared\-only\fR (2):
By default, all variables are included in the declaration file.  With
this option, include only
.I undeclared
variables.  This setting is useful if you want to check for undeclared
variables, since Fortran source files with all variables properly
declared will not result in a
.I .dcl
file.
With this option, common blocks and namelist lists will not be
included in the declaration file, since by their nature they cannot be
undeclared.
.TP
\fBcompact\fR (4):
The declarations are normally prettyprinted to line up neatly in
common columns, as in the declaration files output by the Extended
PFORT Verifier,
.BR pfort (1L).
This option value selects instead compact output, without column
alignment.
.TP
\fBuse\-continuation\-lines\fR (8):
Causes continuation lines to be used where permissible.
The default is to begin a new declaration on each line.  This option
is appropriate to use together with \fBcompact\fR.
.TP
\fBkeywords\-lowercase\fR (16):
Output Fortran keywords in lowercase, instead of the default
uppercase.
.TP
\fBvars\-and\-consts\-lowercase\fR (32):
Output variables and constants in lowercase, instead of the default
uppercase.   Character string constants are not affected by this
option.
.TP
\fBexclude\-sftran3\fR (64):
Omit declarations of internal integer variables produced by the
SFTRAN3 preprocessor,
.BR xsf3 (1L),
as part of the translation of structured Fortran statements to
ordinary Fortran.  These variables have six-character names of the
form
.IR NPRddd ,
.IR NXdddd ,
.IR N2dddd ,
and
.IR N3dddd ,
where
.I d
is a decimal digit.  Because they are invisible in the SFTRAN3 source
code, and will change if the SFTRAN3 code is modified, such variables
should not be explicitly declared.  Instead, they should just assume
the default Fortran INTEGER data type based on their initial letter,
.IR N .
.TP
\fBasterisk\-comment\fR (128):
Use an asterisk as the comment character; the default is otherwise 'C'.
.TP
\fBcomment\-char\-lowercase\fR (256):
Use 'c' instead of 'C' or '*' as the comment character.
.TP
\fBsuppress\-array\-dimensions\fR (512):
Suppress dimensioning of arrays in the generated declarations.
This option is for use with code lacking type declarations, to allow
the declaration files to be inserted without change into the code.  Since
the code will have dimension statements already, dimensioning the
array variables in the type statements of the declaration file is redundant.
This option should be used only in conjunction with
option 2 = undeclared-only because otherwise any arrays that were
dimensioned in a type statement will lose their dimensioning.
.TP
\fBfree\-form\fR (1024):
Produce declarations in free source form.  This mode is automatically
used if the input source is free form.  Use this option to produce
declarations in free form even if the input is in fixed form.  Free
form declarations are indented only 2 columns instead of 6, use the
exclamation mark as the comment character, and indicate continuation
lines by an ampersand at the end of the line to be continued.
.PP
The declaration files contain distinctive comments that mark the start
and end of declarations for each program unit, to facilitate using
text editor macros for merging the declarations back into the source
code.
.PP
The \fBftnchek\fP distribution includes a program, \fBdcl2inc\fP,
which processes declaration files to produce files containing
declarations of all COMMON blocks, in a form suitable for use as
INCLUDE files.  See the
.BR dcl2inc (1L)
man page for the details
of its use.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /mkhtml=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-mkhtml= list
.RS
\}
Produce HTML documentation from source. Creates individual
HTML files from \fBftnchek\fR analysis and code comments. All comments
immediately preceding and following the function or subroutine
definition are captured to the HTML file. No reformatting of
source comments is performed other than stripping of FORTRAN
comment characters.  In addition, the HTML file lists the local
variables declared, common block variables used, functions and
subroutines called, I/O unit usage, and other information about each
subprogram.
Usually you will also want to specify \fB\-call=tree\fP to create the
root HTML file \fCCallTree.html\fR.  (Perhaps this file should be
named \fCindex.html\fR.)
.PP
NOTE: this feature has not been tested on source files containing
modules.  It may not work as expected.
.PP
Various options for the form of the HTML files are controlled
by the \fIlist\fP, which consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
options, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-mkhtml\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-mkhtml=documents\fP (i.e. produce the HTML document files
using the default options), and
\fB\-nomkhtmls\fP is equivalent to \fB\-mkhtml=none\fP.
.PP
For the sake of simplicity, the options for \fB\-mkhtml\fP are the
same as those for \fB\-makedcls\fP except for those that are
inapplicable.  Likewise,  a numeric
form of this setting can be used, formed as the sum of
the numbers in parentheses in the list below.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBdocuments\fR (1):
Create the HTML documents.  (This is implied by any of the other
options, and can be omitted if any other options are given.)
.TP
\fBcompact\fR (4):
The declarations are normally prettyprinted to line up neatly in
common columns.
This option value selects instead compact output, without column
alignment.
.TP
\fBuse\-continuation\-lines\fR (8):
Causes continuation lines to be used instead of
beginning a new declaration on each line.  This option
is appropriate to use together with \fBcompact\fR.
.TP
\fBkeywords\-lowercase\fR (16):
Output Fortran keywords in lowercase, instead of the default
uppercase.
.TP
\fBvars\-and\-consts\-lowercase\fR (32):
Output variables and constants in lowercase, instead of the default
uppercase.   Character string constants are not affected by this
option.
.TP
\fBexclude\-sftran3\fR (64):
Omit declarations of internal integer variables produced by the
SFTRAN3 preprocessor,
.BR xsf3 (1L).
(See \fB\-makedcls\fP for discussion.)
.TP
\fBsuppress\-array\-dimensions\fR (512):
Suppress dimensioning of arrays in the generated declarations.  This
is normally undesirable, but is available if for some reason you
do not want the array dimensions to appear in the HTML.
.TP
\fBfree\-form\fR (1024):
Produce variable declarations in free source form.  This mode is automatically
used if the input source is free form.  This mainly affects the form
of continuation lines if they are used.
.PP
See also: \fB\-calltree\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /module=path
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-module= path
.RS
\}
Specifies a directory in which to store module files created when
MODULE subprograms are processed.  The directory will also be searched
for module files specified by USE statements.  By default,
module files are created and searched for in the same directory where
the source file is located.  When searching for module files for
input, if the file is not found in the default location or the one
specified by this option, the locations specified by the
\fB\-include\fP option will be searched as well.
.PP
If a program uses many modules and these are stored in the same directory as
the source files, that directory can become quite cluttered.  With
this option, you can specify that the modules be placed elsewhere in a
dedicated directory.  This option is similar to the
.BI \-J dir
option of
.BR gfortran (1)
whereas the \fB\-include\fP option is like
.BI \-I dir.
.PP
Note that module files created by \fBftnchek\fP have the suffix
\fI.\|fkm\fP (for FtncheK Module).
.PP
See also: \fB\-include\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /novice
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-novice
.RS
\}
This flag is intended to provide more helpful
output for beginners.  It has two effects:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
(a)
provides an extra message to the effect that a function
that is used but not defined anywhere might be an array which the user
forgot to declare in a DIMENSION statement (since the syntax of
an array reference is the same as that of a function reference).
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
(b)
modifies the form of the error messages and warnings.  If the
flag is turned off by \fB\-nonovice\fP, these messages are printed in a
style more resembling typical compiler error messages.
.PP
Advanced users will want to turn this option off to give output suitable for
use with integrated development environment tools and context-aware
editors like \fBemacs\fP.  These tools can parse error messages
to allow easy jumping to the location of the error.  See the section
on changing the defaults for ways to make \fB\-nonovice\fR the default.
.PP
Default = yes.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /output=filename
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-output= filename
\}
This setting is provided for convenience on
systems which do not allow easy redirection of output from programs.
When this setting is given, the output which normally appears on the
screen will be sent instead to the named file.  Note, however, that
operational errors of \fBftnchek\fP itself (e.g. out of space or cannot
open file) will still be sent to the screen.  The extension for the
filename is optional, and if no extension is given, the
extension \fI.\|lis\fP will be used.

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /pointersize=num
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-pointersize= num
.RS
\}
Specifies the size of a ``Cray pointer'' variable to be \fInum\fP bytes.
Default = turn-on = 4 bytes.
.PP
The pointer size is used to inform precision mismatch warnings
involving pointer variables, for example when a pointer is assigned a
value from an allocation routine, or passed as a subprogram parameter.
This option has nothing to do with Fortran 90 pointers.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-portability\fP, \fB\-truncation\fP,
\fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /portability=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-portability= list
.RS
\}
\fBftnchek\fP will give warnings for a variety of
non-portable usages.  Examples include the use of tabs except in comments
or inside strings, the use of Hollerith constants as data objects, and the
equivalencing of variables of different data types.  This option does
not produce warnings for supported extensions to the Fortran standard, which
may also cause portability problems.  To catch those, use
the \fB\-f77\fP or \fB\-f90\fP setting.
By default, all warnings are turned off.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
possible portability problems.  The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about nonportable usages, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-portability\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-portability=all\fP, and \fB\-noportability\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-portability=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBbackslash\fP:
Backslash character in strings.  Since some compilers treat the
backslash as an escape character, its presence can cause problems even
though it is used in a standard-conforming way.
.TP
\fBcommon\-alignment\fP:
COMMON block variables not in descending order of storage size.  Some
compilers require this ordering because of storage alignment requirements.
.TP
\fBconcrete\-kind\fP:
Variable declarations specifying concrete kind parameters, or
expressions or assignment statements mixing concrete with default or
selected kinds.  Concrete kind parameters are those given explicit numerical
values.  Since the Fortran standard does not specify a meaning for
concrete kind parameters, there is no guarantee that a concrete value
used will mean the same thing to different compilers, or that the
value will even be a supported kind.  Programmers who need non-default
kinds should use the intrinsics KIND, SELECTED_INT_KIND, and
SELECTED_REAL_KIND to define kind parameters giving the desired
numerical range and precision.
.TP
\fBhollerith\fP:
Hollerith constants (other than within FORMAT
specifications).  The Hollerith data type is a feature of Fortran IV
that has been deleted in the Fortran 77 standard.  It is superseded
by the character data type.  Storing Hollerith data in variables of a
numeric or logical data type is nonportable due to differing word sizes.
.TP
\fBlong\-string\fP:
String constants, variables, or expressions over 255 chars long.
.TP
\fBmixed\-equivalence\fP:
Variables of different data types equivalenced.
.TP
\fBmixed\-kind\fP:
Expressions or assignment statements mixing variables of the same type
but with different default or selected kind parameters.  As best it
can, \fBftnchek\fP tries not to issue warnings when the Standard
guarantees that the operation is legitimate, for instance mixing a
selected kind that is equivalent to single-precision REAL with default
REAL.  Some legitimate operations may still receive warnings under
\fB\-truncation\fP if it can be determined that there is a difference
in precision between the operands.
.IP
Note that a warning is also given when a kind parameter defined for
one type (e.g. using SELECTED_INT_KIND) is used to declare a variable
of a different type (e.g. a REAL).  This warning is not controlled by
this flag, since it is probably an error.  This warning can be turned
off only by \fB\-nocheck\fP.
.TP
\fBmixed\-size\fP:
Variables declared with default precision used with variables given
explicit precision, in expressions, assignments, or as arguments.  For
example, if a variable declared as REAL*8 is treated as
equivalent to DOUBLE PRECISION.
.TP
\fBparam\-implicit\-type\fP:
Implicit typing of a parameter by the data type of the value assigned,
if it differs from the default type.  This warning can only occur if
implicit parameter typing has been turned on by the
\fB\-source=param\-implicit\-type\fP option, or
if the PARAMETER statement is of the nonstandard form without
parentheses.  If this option is turned on,
then any instances where implicit parameter typing
occurs and where the implicit type is different from the default type based
on the first letter of the parameter name, will be warned
about.  Implicit parameter typing can change the
semantics of statements where the parameter is used, causing
portability problems.
.TP
\fBreal\-do\fP:
Non-integer DO loop index and bounds.  These can cause a program's
results to depend on the hardware characteristics of the particular
computer used.
.TP
\fBtab\fP:
Tabs in source code.  Tabs are interpreted differently by different
compilers.  This warning will be given only once, at the end of the
file.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-f90\fP, \fB\-f95\fP,
\fB\-pretty\fP, \fB\-style\fP, \fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /pretty=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-pretty= list
.RS
\}
Controls certain messages related to the appearance of
the source code.  These warn about things that might
make a program less readable or be deceptive to the reader.
By default, all warnings are turned on.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
appearance.  The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
Since all warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about misleading appearances, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-pretty\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-pretty=all\fP, and \fB\-nopretty\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-pretty=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBalternate\-return\fP:
A RETURN statement has a constant specifying an alternate return point
that is not between 0 and the number of dummy arguments that are
labels.  This is legal, and has the same effect as a RETURN with no
alternate return expression, but suggests that the programmer intended
to use an alternate return label that is not provided.
.TP
\fBembedded\-space\fP:
Space embedded in variable names or in multi-character operators such
as \fC**\fR.
.TP
\fBcontinuation\fP:
Continuation mark following a comment line.
.TP
\fBlong\-line\fP:
Lines (except comments) over 72 columns in width (beyond 72 is
normally ignored by compiler).
.TP
\fBmissing\-space\fP:
Lack of space between variable and a preceding keyword.
.TP
\fBmultiple\-common\fP:
COMMON block declared in multiple statements.  No warning is given if the
statements are consecutive except for comment lines.
.TP
\fBmultiple\-namelist\fP:
NAMELIST declared in multiple statements.  No warning is given if the
statements are consecutive except for comment lines.
.TP
\fBparentheses\fP:
Parentheses around a variable by itself.  As a subprogram argument,
this makes the argument an expression, not modifiable by the subprogram.
.PP
Note that in free source form, extra space and missing space are
forbidden by the Fortran 90 Standard, and are not mere style violations.  In
this case the warnings are replaced by syntax error messages,
and can be turned off only by using \fB\-nocheck\fP.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-portability\fP, \fB\-style\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /project=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-project= list
.RS
\}
\fBftnchek\fP will create a project file from each
source file that is input while this option is turned on.  The project
file will be given the same name as the input file, but with the
extension \fI.\|f\fP or \fI.\|for\fP replaced by \fI.\|prj\fP.
(If input is from standard input, the project file is named
.IR ftnchek.\|prj .)
Default = none.
.PP
NOTE: Project files do not work correctly on programs containing
modules.  Project files were developed for use with Fortran 77
programs, to avoid the need for re-processing source files containing
frequently used subprograms when programs calling those subprograms
were checked.  In Fortran 90, modules are a better way to meet this
need, and should be used instead when developing new code.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
options, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-project\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-project=all\fP, and \fB\-noproject\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-project=none\fP.
The keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBcreate\fP:
Produce a project file.  The default is not to produce a project
file.  If this option is not turned on, the other options have no effect.
.TP
\fBtrim\-calls\fP:
Trim the amount of information stored in the project file about
subprogram declarations and calls.  This is the default.  Turn this
option off only in rare situations.  (See discussion below.)
The amount of trimming varies depending on the \fB\-library\fP flag.
More information is trimmed if that flag is turned on.
.TP
\fBtrim\-common\fP:
Trim the number of common block declarations stored in the project
file.  This is the default.  Turn this option off only in rare
situations.  (See discussion below.)
This option has no effect if the \fB\-library\fP flag is turned off:
when not in library mode, no trimming of common block declarations is
done regardless of this option.
.PP
A project file contains a summary of information from the source file,
for use in checking agreement
among FUNCTION, SUBROUTINE, and COMMON
usages in other files.  It
allows incremental checking, which saves time whenever you have a
large set of files containing shared subroutines, most of which seldom
change.  You can run \fBftnchek\fP once on each file with the
\fB\-project\fP flag set, creating the project files.  Usually you
would also set the \fB\-library\fP and \fB\-noextern\fP flags at this
time, to suppress messages relating to consistency with other files.
Only error messages pertaining to each file by itself will be printed
at this time.  Thereafter, run \fBftnchek\fP without these flags on all
the project files together, to check consistency among the different
files.  All messages internal to the individual files will now be
omitted.  Only when a file is altered will a new project file need to
be made for it.
.PP
Naturally, when the \fB\-project\fP option is turned on, \fBftnchek\fP will not
read project files as input.
.PP
Ordinarily, the trim options should be left on when you intend to
create project files for future input to \fBftnchek\fP.  Since trimming
is on by default, this means that simply giving the command
\fB\-project\fP with no option list is the recommended mode.  The trim
options are provided only as a convenience for those who want to make
use of project files for purposes other than checking the program with
\fBftnchek\fP.  To use project files for their intended purpose, the
trim options should not be turned off.
.PP
Project files contain only information needed for checking
agreement between files.  This means that a project file is of no use if all
program units of the complete program are contained in a single file.
.PP
A more detailed discussion is given in the
section on Using Project Files.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /pure
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-pure
.RS
\}
Assume functions are ``pure'', i.e., they will not have
side effects by modifying their arguments or variables in a COMMON
block.  When this flag is in effect, \fBftnchek\fP will base its
determination of set and used status of the actual arguments on the
assumption that arguments passed to a function are not altered.  It
will also issue a warning if a function is found to modify any of its
arguments or any COMMON variables.
Default = yes.
.PP
When this flag is turned off, actual arguments passed to functions
will be handled the same way as actual arguments passed to
subroutines.  This means that \fBftnchek\fP will assume that arguments
may be modified by the functions.  No warnings will be given if a
function is found to have side effects.  Because stricter checking is
possible if functions are assumed to be pure, you should turn this flag
off only if your program actually uses functions with side effects.
.PP
NOTE: in Fortran 90, the PURE attribute for function declarations was
introduced, allowing selected functions to be declared pure while
others can be impure.  At this time \fBftnchek\fP has not been
modified to recognize the PURE attribute on a per-function basis.  We
are working on it.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /quiet
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-quiet
.RS
\}
This option reduces
the amount of output relating to normal operation, so that error
messages are more apparent.  This option is provided for the
convenience of users who are checking large suites of files.  The
eliminated output includes the names of project files, and the message
reporting that no syntax errors were found.  It also eliminates some
blank lines that are ordinarily included for clarity. (Some of this output is
turned back on by the \fB\-list\fP and \fB\-symtab\fP options.)  Default
= no.
.PP
Note: the way to remember the difference  between the \fB\-quiet\fP
and \fB\-brief\fP is that \fB\-quiet\fP doesn't suppress any
warning-related information, whereas \fB\-brief\fP does.
.PP
See also: \fB\-brief\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /resources
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-resources
.RS
\}
Prints the amount of resources used by \fBftnchek\fP in processing the
program.  This listing may be useful in analyzing the size and
complexity of a program.  It can also help in choosing larger
sizes for \fBftnchek\fP's internal tables if they are too small to
analyze a particular program.
Default = no.
.PP
In this listing, the term ``chunk size'' is the size of the blocks of
memory allocated to store the item in question, in units of the size
of one item, not necessarily in bytes.  When the initially allocated
space is filled up, more memory is allocated in chunks of this size.
The following is an explanation of the items printed:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Source lines processed:"
Total number of lines of code, with separate totals for statement
lines and comment lines.  Comment lines include lines with 'C' or '*'
in column 1 as well as blank lines and lines containing only an inline
comment.  Statement lines are all other lines, including lines that
have an inline comment following some code.  Continuation lines are
counted as separate lines.  Lines in include files are counted each
time the file is included.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Total executable statements:"
Number of statements in the program, other than specification, data,
statement-function, FORMAT, ENTRY, and END statements.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Total number of prog units:"
A program unit is any external subprogram, including the main program,
subroutines, functions, modules and block data units.  This count is of
program units defined within the source, not program units referenced.  Statement
functions are not included.  A subprogram with multiple entry points
is only counted once.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Total statement labels defined"
Number of labels attached to statements (often called statement
numbers).  The total label count for the entire program is given, as well as
the maximum number in any single subprogram.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max identifier name chars:"
Number of characters used for storing identifier names.  An identifier
is a variable, subprogram, or common block name.  Local names are
those of local variables in a subprogram, whereas
global names refer
to subprogram and common block names, as well as dummy argument names
and common variable names.  Actual argument text (up to 15 characters
for each argument) is also included here.  The space used for local
names is not recovered at the end of each program unit, so this number, like
global space,
grows until the whole program is analyzed.  Unfortunately, this figure
may include some text stored more than
once, although a heuristic is used that will avoid duplicates in many
cases.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max token text chars:"
A token is the smallest syntactic unit of the FORTRAN language above
the level of individual characters. For instance a token can be a
variable name, a numerical constant, a quoted text string, or a
punctuation character.  Token text is stored while a program unit is being
processed.  For technical reasons, single-character tokens are not
included in this total.  Items that are not represented in the
symbol table may be duplicated.  The space for token text is recovered
at the end of each program unit, so this figure represents the maximum for
any one program unit.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max local symbols:"
This is the largest number of entries in the local symbol table for
any program unit.  Local symbol table entries include all variables and
parameters, common block names, statement functions, external
subprograms and intrinsic functions referenced by the program unit.  Literal
constants are not stored in the local symbol table.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max global symbols:"
This is the number of entries in the global symbol table at the end of
processing.  Global symbol table entries include external subprogram
and common block names.  Intrinsic functions and statement functions
are not included.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max number of tokenlists:"
A token list is a sequence of tokens representing the actual or dummy
argument list of a subprogram, or the list of variables in a common
block or namelist.  Therefore this number represents the largest sum
of COMMON, CALL, NAMELIST and ENTRY statements and function invocations for any
one program unit.  The space is recovered at the end of each program unit.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Max token list/tree space:"
This is the largest number of tokens in all the token lists and token
trees of any one program unit.  A token tree is formed when analyzing an
expression: each operand is a leaf of the tree, and the operators are
the nodes.  Therefore this number is a measure of the maximum
complexity of an individual program unit.  For instance a program unit with many
long arithmetic expressions will have a high number.  Note that unlike
token text described above, the number of tokens is independent of the
length of the variable names or literal constants in the expressions.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Number of subprogram invocations:"
This is the sum over all program units of the number of
CALL statements and function invocations (except intrinsic functions
and statement functions).
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Number of common block decls:"
This is the sum over all program units of the number of common block
declarations.  That is, each declaration of a block in a different
program unit is counted separately.  (The standard allows multiple
declarations of a block within the same program unit; these are counted as
only one declaration since they are equivalent to a single long
declaration.)
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
.I "Number of array dim & param ptrs:"
This is the sum over all program units of the number of array dimension and
parameter definition text strings saved for use by the
\fB\-makedcls\fP option.  The length of the text strings is not
counted.  Each dimension of a multidimensional array is counted separately.
.PP
These numbers are obviously not the same when project files are used
in place of the original source code.  Even the numbers for global
entities may be different, since some redundant information is
eliminated in project files.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /sixchar
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-sixchar
.RS
\}
One of the goals of the \fBftnchek\fP program is to
help users to write portable Fortran programs.  One potential source
of nonportability in Fortran 77 is the use of variable names that are longer than
six characters.  Some compilers just ignore the extra characters.
This behavior could potentially lead to two different variables being
considered as the same.  For instance, variables named AVERAGECOST
and AVERAGEPRICE are the same in the first six characters.  If
you wish to catch such possible conflicts, use this flag.
Since Fortran 90 changed the maximum length of variable names to 31
characters, this option is probably not useful any more.  Default =
no.
.PP
Use \fB\-f77=f90\fP if you want to list \fIall\fP variables longer
than six characters, not just those pairs that are the same in the
first six.  Use \fB\-f90=long\-name\fP to report names even longer
than the new standard.
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-f90\fP \fB\-portability\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /sort
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-sort
.RS
\}
Specifies that a sorted list of all program units used in the
program be printed.  This list is in ``prerequisite'' order, i.e. each
program unit is printed only after all the program units from which it is called
have been printed.  This is also called a ``topological sort'' of the
call tree.  Each program unit is listed only once.  Routines that are not in
the call tree of the main program are omitted.  If there are any
cycles in the call graph (illegal in standard Fortran) they
will be detected and diagnosed.  Default = no.
.PP
NOTE: this feature has not been tested on source files containing
modules.  It may not work as expected.
.PP
See also: \fB\-calltree\fP,
\fB\-crossref\fP, \fB\-symtab\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /source=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-source= list
.RS
\}
This setting controls certain options about the form of the Fortran
source code.  The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
options, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-source\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-source=all\fP, and \fB\-nosource\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-source=none\fP.
.PP
For compatibility with previous versions of \fBftnchek\fP, a numeric
form of this setting is also accepted:  the \fIlist\fP is replaced by
a number which is the sum of the numbers in parentheses beside
the keywords in the following list.  (The \fBfixed\fP and \fBfree\fP
options do not have numeric values.)
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBfixed\fP:
Force interpretation
of the source as fixed form (with supported extensions such as
exclamation mark for comments).  Statements must be in columns 7 to 72
(unless the \fB\-cols\fP setting has been used to change this), and
blanks are not significant outside character context (but warned
about under the \fB\-pretty\fP option).  Fixed form is the default mode
unless the source file extension is \fI.\|f90\fP, \fI.\|F90\fP,
\fI.\|f95\fP, or \fI.\|F95\fP.
Use this option to override the default.
This option cannot be given together with \fB\-source=free\fP.
.TP
\fBfree\fP:
Force interpretation
of the source as free form.  Statements may be anywhere in
columns 1 to 132, comments can only begin with an exclamation mark,
and blanks are required in some places such as between identifiers and
keywords.  Free form is the default mode if the source
file extension is \fI.\|f90\fP, \fI.\|F90\fP,
\fI.\|f95\fP, or \fI.\|F95\fP.
Use this option if the free-form source is from
standard input or from a file with some other extension.
This option cannot be given
together with \fB\-source=fixed\fP or \fB\-source=dec\-tab\fP
.TP
\fBdec\-tab\fP (1):
Accept DEC-style tab-formatted source.  A line beginning with an
initial tab will be treated as a new statement line unless the
character after the tab is a nonzero digit, in which case it is
treated as a continuation line.  The next column after the
tab or continuation mark is taken as column 7.  A warning will be
given in the case where the line is a continuation, if
\fB\-f77=dec\-tab\fP is in effect.
.TP
\fBvms\-include\fP (2):
Accept VMS-style INCLUDE statements.  These follow the normal
syntax, but with the following additional features: (1) the file
extension, if not given, defaults to the same as a normal source file
extension; and (2) the option /LIST or /NOLIST can be
appended to the include-file name, to control listing of its contents.
.TP
\fBunix\-backslash\fP (4):
Handle UNIX-style backslash escapes in character strings.
The escape sequence following the backslash will be evaluated
according to the ANSI standard for strings in C: up to three digits signify
an octal value, an x signifies the start of a hexadecimal constant,
any of the letters a b f n r t signify special control codes, and any
other character (including newline) signifies the character itself.
When this source code option is in effect,
a warning will be given if the \fB\-f77=backslash\fP
setting is specified.
.IP
The default behavior is to treat the backslash
like any other normal character, but a warning about
portability will be generated if the \fB\-portability\fP flag is set.
Because of the fact that some compilers treat the backslash in a
nonstandard way, it is possible for standard-conforming programs to be
non-portable if they use the backslash character in strings.
.IP
Since \fBftnchek\fP does not do much with the interpreted string, it
is seldom necessary to use this option.  It is needed in order to
avoid spurious warnings only if (a) the program being checked uses
backslash to embed an apostrophe or quote mark in a string
instead of using the standard mechanism of doubling the delimiter; (b)
the backslash is used to escape the end-of-line in order to continue
a string across multiple source lines; or (c) a PARAMETER
definition uses an intrinsic string function such as LEN with
such a string as argument, and that value is later used to define
array dimensions, etc.
.TP
\fBparam\-implicit\-type\fP (8):
Implicit typing of a parameter by the data type of the value assigned.
Some non-standard compilers may allow the data type of the value to
override the
Fortran 77 default type of a parameter that is based on the first
letter of the parameter name.  This option only applies to
PARAMETER statements of the standard form which has parentheses.
A parameter that has been
explicitly declared in a type statement prior to the PARAMETER
statement is not affected by this option.  A warning will be given
under the \fB\-f77=param\-implicit\-type\fP or
\fB\-portability=param\-implicit\-type\fP option.
.IP
Note that this implicit typing is treated as equivalent to an explicit
type declaration for the parameter.  Therefore, if you use
\fB\-makedcls=undeclared\-only\fP to generate declarations only of undeclared
variables, these parameters will \fInot\fP be included.
.TP
\fBdec\-param\-standard\-type\fP (16):
Follow the Fortran 77 rule for data typing of DEC Fortran style
parameters.  These are declared using a nonstandard form of the
PARAMETER statement which lacks parentheses.  According to DEC
Fortran, parameters defined by this form of the statement have their
data type given by the data type of the value assigned.  Use this
option to tell \fBftnchek\fP not to follow this rule but instead to use the
same rule as for standard PARAMETER statements.  This option
does not apply to PARAMETER statements of the standard form.
.PP
By default, all these source code options are turned off, except for
the \fBvms\-include\fP option, which is on by default in the VMS version..
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-include\fP, \fB\-portability\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /style=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-style= list
.RS
\}
Provides extra-picky warnings about obsolescent or old-fashioned
programming constructions.  This option is helpful for efforts to follow a
modern programming style.  (Most of the things complained about under
this option are forbidden in the \fBF\fP subset language.)  By
default, all warnings are turned off.
.PP
The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
options, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-style\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-style=all\fP, and \fB\-nostyle\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-style=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBblock\-if\fP:
Complain about arithmetic IF statement.  Accept block IF or logical IF
(which controls a single statement).
.TP
\fBconstruct\-name\fP:
Complain about unnamed block constructs: IF,
DO, and SELECT CASE.  Note that if a construct name is present on the
opening statement of a construct, then it is required to be present on
all other component statements (ELSE, END IF, etc.) of the construct.
In that case a missing construct name on those statements generates a
syntax error regardless of this option.  The purpose of this option is
to warn if the construct completely lacks the optional name.
.TP
\fBdistinct\-do\fP:
Complain if two DO loops share a common terminator statement.
.TP
\fBdo\-construct\fP:
Complain if terminator of a DO loop is anything other than an END DO
or CONTINUE statement.  This is the requirement in order for the loop to
meet the Fortran 90 definition of a do-construct.
.TP
\fBdo\-enddo\fP:
Complain if terminator of a DO loop is anything other than an END DO
statement.  (This option overrides the \fBdo\-construct\fP option,
being even stricter.)
.TP
\fBend\-name\fP:
Complain about the absence of the subprogram name on structured END
statements.
.TP
\fBformat\-stmt\fP:
Complain about the presence of FORMAT statements.  Only the FORMAT
statements themselves are flagged, not the references to them in I/O lists.
.TP
\fBgoto\fP:
Complain about the presence of unconditional, computed or assigned
GOTO statements.  Also complain about alternate returns (but not about
labels as subprogram arguments).
.TP
\fBlabeled\-stmt\fP:
Complain about the presence of labels (numbers) on statements other
than FORMAT statements.  (Since FORMAT statements are arguably
convenient and not readily abused, complaints about them are
controlled by the separate \fBformat\-stmt\fP keyword.)
.TP
\fBprogram\-stmt\fP:
Complain about the absence of a PROGRAM statement at the head of the
main program.
.TP
\fBstructured\-end\fP:
Complain about the use of a plain END statement to end a subprogram,
rather than a structured END statement (END PROGRAM, END SUBROUTINE,
END FUNCTION, or END BLOCK DATA).
.PP
See also: \fB\-f77\fP, \fB\-f90\fP, \fB\-f95\fP, \fB\-pretty\fP,
\fB\-portability\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /symtab
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-symtab
.RS
\}
A symbol table will be printed out for each program unit,
listing all identifiers mentioned in the program unit.  This table gives the
name of each variable, its datatype, and the number of dimensions for
arrays.  An asterisk (*) indicates that the variable has been
implicitly typed, rather than being named in an explicit type
declaration statement.  The table also lists all subprograms invoked
by the program unit, all COMMON blocks declared, etc.  Default = no.
.PP
NOTE: the layout of the symbol table was designed for Fortran 77.
Things may not appear neatly aligned when long variable names,
user-defined type names, etc., appear.  A redesign appropriate for
Fortran 90 is in the works.  Meanwhile, the information is all there,
just not necessarily lined up in columns.
.PP
Also, for each program unit, a label table will be printed.  The table lists
each label defined in the program unit; the line on which said statement
label is defined; and the statement type (executable, format, or
specification).  The labels are listed in sequential order.
.PP
Each user-defined (derived) type in the program unit will be printed out,
listing its components and their types.
.PP
Also printed is a table describing the I/O units used by the program unit,
together with information about how they are used: what operations
are performed, whether the access is sequential or direct, and whether
the I/O is formatted or unformatted.
.PP
See also: \fB\-calltree\fP, \fB\-crossref\fP, \fB\-list\fP,
\fB\-sort\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /truncation=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-truncation= list
.RS
\}
Warn about possible truncation (or roundoff) errors.  Most of these
are related to integer arithmetic.  By default, all warnings are
turned on.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
possible truncation errors.  The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
Since all warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about truncation, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-truncation\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-truncation=all\fP, and \fB\-notruncation\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-truncation=none\fP.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBint\-div\-exponent\fP:
Use of the result of integer division as an exponent.
This suggests that a real quotient is intended.
An example would be writing \fCX**(1/3)\fR to evaluate the cube root
of \fCX\fR. The correct expression is \fCX**(1./3.)\fR.
.TP
\fBint\-div\-real\fP:
Conversion of an expression involving an integer division to real.
This suggests that a real quotient is intended.
.TP
\fBint\-div\-zero\fP:
Division in an integer constant expression that
yields a result of zero.
.TP
\fBint\-neg\-power\fP:
Exponentiation of an integer by a negative
integer (which yields zero unless the base integer is 1 in magnitude).
This suggests that a real base is intended.
.TP
\fBkind\fP:
Possible loss of precision or overflow of range when assigning a
numerical value of one kind to a variable of a different kind.
.TP
\fBpromotion\fP:
Automatic conversion of a lower precision quantity to one of higher
precision.  The loss of accuracy for real variables in this process is
comparable to the corresponding demotion.  No warning is given for
promotion of integer quantities to real since this is ordinarily
exact.
.TP
\fBreal\-do\-index\fP:
Use of a non-integer DO index in a
loop with integer bounds.
An integer DO index with real bounds is always
warned about regardless of this setting.
.TP
\fBreal\-subscript\fP:
Use of a non-integer array subscript.
.TP
\fBsignificant\-figures\fP:
Overspecifying a single precision constant.  This may indicate that a
double precision constant was intended.
.TP
\fBsize\-demotion\fP:
Automatic conversion of a higher precision quantity to one of lower
precision of the same type.  This warning only occurs when an explicit
size is used in declaring the type of one or both operands in an
assignment.  For example, a warning wil be issued where a REAL*8
variable is assigned to a REAL variable, if the default wordsize
of 4 is in effect.  A warning is also issued if a long integer is
assigned to a shorter one, for example, if an INTEGER
expression is assigned to an INTEGER*2 variable.  There is one
exception to this last case, namely if the right hand side of the assignment
is a small literal constant (less than 128).
.TP
\fBtype\-demotion\fP:
Automatic conversion of a higher precision quantity to one of lower
precision of different type.  This warning includes conversion of real
quantities to integer, double precision to single precision real, and
assignment of a longer character string to a shorter one.
.PP
The warnings about promotion and demotion also apply to complex
constants, considering the precision to be that of the real or
imaginary part.
Warnings about promotions and demotions are given only when
the conversion is done automatically, e.g. in expressions of mixed
precision or in an assignment statement.  If intrinsic
functions such as INT are used to perform the conversion, no warning
is given.
.PP
See also: \fB\-portability\fP, \fB\-wordsize\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /type=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-type= list
.RS
\}
Warn about issues related to derived types, also
called structured types.  These are user-defined types declared in
TYPE statements.  By default, all warnings are turned on.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
possible errors in the use of derived types.  The \fIlist\fP consists
of keywords separated by commas or colons.  Since all warnings are on
by default, include a keyword prefixed by \fBno\-\fP to turn off a
particular warning.  There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to
turn on all the warnings about derived types, \fBnone\fP to turn them
all off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a
brief explanation of each.  If \fIlist\fP is omitted,
\fB\-type\fP is equivalent to \fB\-type=all\fP, and
\fB\-notype\fP is equivalent to \fB\-type=none\fP.  The
warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBempty\fP:
A derived type definition has no components.
.TP
\fBsequence\fP:
Two independently defined derived types match except for SEQUENCE
attribute.  According to the Fortran standard, two definitions in
separate program units define the same type if they have the same
name, the SEQUENCE property, and no PRIVATE components, and if the
components agree in order, name, and attributes.  Otherwise, they are
different derived types.  This warning is intended to catch situations
where the programmer omitted the SEQUENCE attribute but intended the
types to be the same, for instance in order to pass arguments of that
type to a subprogram.  In such a situation
(if the \fB\-arguments=type\fP option is turned on),
\fBftnchek\fP will warn about an argument type mismatch, and this
warning will identify the reason.
.IP
This issue does not apply to a type that is defined in a module and
USEd by different program units, or inherited by host association in
an internal procedure.  In those cases the type is
automatically the same in each unit even if it does not
have the SEQUENCE attribute.
.TP
\fBunused\fP:
A derived type that is declared but not used to define any variables
or constructed objects of that type.
.PP
See also: \fB\-arguments\fP, \fB\-portability\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /usage=list
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-usage= list
.RS
\}
Warn about unused or possible uninitialized variables,
unused common blocks, undefined or unused statement labels, and unused or undefined subprograms.
By default, all warnings are
turned on.
.PP
This setting provides detailed control over the warnings about
possible usage errors.  The \fIlist\fP consists of keywords
separated by commas or colons.
Since all warnings are on by default, include a keyword prefixed by
\fBno\-\fP to turn off a particular warning.
There are three special keywords: \fBall\fP to turn on all the
warnings about usage, \fBnone\fP to turn them all
off, and \fBhelp\fP to print the list of all the keywords with a brief
explanation of each.
If \fIlist\fP is omitted, \fB\-usage\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-usage=all\fP, and \fB\-nousage\fP is equivalent to
\fB\-usage=none\fP.
These warnings cover four main categories of objects: subprogram dummy
arguments, common blocks and variables, subprograms and functions, and
local variables.  Warnings include undefined items, multiply defined
items, unused items, etc.
The warning keywords with their meanings are as follows:
.TP \w'128:'u+2n
\fBarg\-alias\fP:
A scalar dummy argument is actually the same as another and is (or may be)
modified.  The Fortran 77 standard (section 15.9.3.6) prohibits
modifying an argument that is aliased to another.
.TP
\fBarg\-array\-alias\fP:
A dummy argument which is an array or array element is in the same array as
another and is modified.  This flag is similar to \fBarg\-alias\fP but
provides separate control over array arguments.  It is harder to
tell if aliasing is occurring in the case of arrays, so if
\fBftnchek\fP gives too many false warnings, this flag allows the
array-related ones to be turned off without suppressing the warnings
for scalars.
.TP
\fBarg\-common\-alias\fP:
A scalar dummy argument is the same as a common variable in the
subprogram, and either is modified.  This is also prohibited by the
Fortran 77 standard.  If common checking is not exact (see the
\fB\-common\fP setting), it is harder to tell if aliasing is
occurring, so the warning is
given if the variable is anywhere in a common block that is declared
by the subprogram.
.TP
\fBarg\-common\-array\-alias\fP:
A dummy argument which is an array or array element is in the same
array as a common variable, and either is modified.  If common
checking is not exact, the variable can be anywhere in a common block
that is declared by the subprogram.
.TP
\fBarg\-const\-modified\fP:
A subprogram modifies an argument which is a constant or an
expression.  Such an action could cause anomalous behavior of the program.
.TP
\fBarg\-unused\fP:
A dummy argument is declared but never used.  This is similar to the
\fBvar\-unused\fP keyword described below, but applies only to arguments.
.TP
\fBcom\-block\-unused\fP:
A common block is declared but none of the variables in it are
used by any subprogram.
This warning is suppressed if the common strictness setting is 0.
.TP
\fBcom\-block\-volatile\fP:
A common block may lose the definition of its contents if common
blocks are volatile.  This option only has an effect if the
\fB\-common=volatile\fP flag is in effect.  See the discussion of the
\fB\-common\fP setting above.
.TP
\fBcom\-var\-set\-unused\fP:
A common variable is assigned a value, but its value is not used by
any subprogram.
This warning is suppressed if the common strictness setting is 0.
.TP
\fBcom\-var\-uninitialized\fP:
A common variable's value is used in some subprogram, but is not set
anywhere.
Unfortunately, \fBftnchek\fP does
not do a thorough enough analysis of the calling sequence to know
which routines are called before others.  So warnings about this type
of error will only be given for cases in which a variable is used in
some routine but not set in any other routine.   Checking of
individual COMMON variables is done only if the \fB\-common\fP
setting is 3 (variable by variable agreement).
This warning is suppressed if the common strictness setting is 0.
.TP
\fBcom\-var\-unused\fP:
A common variable is declared but not used by any subprogram.
This warning is suppressed if the common strictness setting is 0.
.TP
\fBdeallocate\-unallocated\fP:
Deallocation of an unallocatable variable.  It is not possible
for \fBftnchek\fP to be sure of the allocation status of a variable.
It bases its decision on the most recently seen statement affecting
the status.
.TP
\fBdo\-index\-modified\fP:
A variable that is the index of a DO loop is modified by some
statement within the range of the loop.  The Standard permits an
active DO variable to be modified only by the incrementation mechanism
of the DO statement.
.TP
\fBext\-multiply\-defined\fP:
An external (a subroutine or function) is defined more than once.
Definition of an external means providing the body of its source code.
.TP
\fBext\-declared\-only\fP:
A name is declared in an EXTERNAL statement in some program unit, but
is not defined or used anywhere.
.TP
\fBext\-undefined\fP:
An external is used (invoked) but not defined anywhere.  This option
is equivalent to the \fB\-external\fP flag.  If the subprogram is
invoked more than once, those invocations will still be checked for
consistency.
.TP
\fBext\-unused\fP:
An external is defined (its subprogram body is present) but it is not
used.  A subprogram is considered unused even if it is
invoked by some other subprogram, if it cannot be called from any thread
of execution starting with the main program.
The agreement of the subprogram's
arguments with its invocations is still checked even if this warning is
turned off.
If there is no main program, then this warning is issued only if the
subprogram is not invoked anywhere.
This warning is suppressed in library mode, but library mode has the
additional effect of suppressing argument checking for unused routines.
.TP
\fBlabel\-undefined\fP:
A statement refers to a label that has not been defined.
.TP
\fBlabel\-unused\fP:
A statement label is defined, but never referred to.
.TP
\fBmod-var-set-unused\fP:
A variable declared in a module is set somewhere, but not used in any
program unit that USEs the module.
.TP
\fBmod-var-uninitialized\fP:
A variable declared in a module is used somewhere, but not set anywhere.
.TP
\fBmod-var-unused\fP:
A variable declared in a module is not referenced in any program unit
that USEs the module; or some program that USEs a module
does not reference any of the variables declared in the module.
.TP
\fBnullify\-allocated\fP:
A pointer associated with allocated storage is disassociated
(nullified).  This is not an error in standard Fortran, but may lead
to the storage becoming inaccessible.  It is not possible
for \fBftnchek\fP to be sure of the allocation status of a variable.
It bases its decision on the most recently seen statement affecting
the status.
.TP
\fBreallocate\-allocated\fP:
Allocation of a variable that is already allocated.  It is not possible
for \fBftnchek\fP to be sure of the allocation status of a variable.
It bases its decision on the most recently seen statement affecting
the status.
.TP
\fBvar\-set\-unused\fP:
A local variable is assigned a value, but that value is not used.
.TP
\fBvar\-uninitialized\fP:
A local variable's value may be used before it is assigned.
Sometimes \fBftnchek\fP makes a mistake in the warnings about local
variable usage.  Usually it errs on the side of giving a warning where no
problem exists, but in rare cases it may fail to warn where the
problem does exist.  See the section on Bugs for examples.  If
variables are equivalenced, the rule used by \fBftnchek\fP is that a
reference to any variable implies the same reference to all variables
it is equivalenced to.  For arrays, the rule is that a reference to
any array element is treated as a reference to all elements of the array.
.TP
\fBvar\-unused\fP:
A local variable is declared (for instance, in a type declaration) but
is not used in the program unit.  Does not apply to dummy arguments: warnings
about them are controlled by the keyword \fBarg\-unused\fP described above.
.PP
Note: In versions of \fBftnchek\fP prior to 2.10, the
\fB\-usage\fP flag took a numeric argument instead of a list of
options.
For the sake of users who may have written scripts invoking
\fBftnchek\fP in this way, the numeric form is still
accepted.  The numeric setting is composed of three digits.  The first
digit (hundreds
place) controls warnings about subprograms (functions and
subroutines), the second digit (tens place) warnings about common
blocks and common variables,, and the third digit (ones place)
warnings about local variables.  Each digit controls warnings
according to the convention that a 1 means warn about undefined items
and variables that are used before set,
a 2 means warn about items that are unused, and a 3 means warn about
both types.  These numbers are now converted to the appropriate
values for the above-listed keywords, except for \fBcom\-block\-volatile\fP,
which is not affected by the numeric argument.
.PP
See also: \fB\-common\fP, \fB\-declare\fP, \fB\-extern\fP,
\fB\-library\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /version
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.B \-version
.RS
\}
This option causes \fBftnchek\fP to print a line giving the version
number, release date, and patch level of the program.
If no files are given, it then exits.  If files are given, the
effect of this option is to include the patch level (normally omitted)
in the version information printed at the start of processing.
Default = no.
.PP
See also: \fB\-help\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /wordsize=num
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-wordsize= num
.RS
\}
Specifies the default word size to be \fInum\fP bytes.  This is the size of
logical and single-precision numeric variables that are not given
explicit precisions.  (Explicit precisions
for non-character variables are an extension to the Fortran 77
Standard, and are given by type declarations such as \fCREAL*8 X\fR.)
Double-precision and complex variables will be twice
this value, and double complex variables four times.
Quad-precision constants and intrinsic function results will be four
times this value.  Note that variables declared as \fCREAL*16\fR will
be regarded as quad precision only if the word size is 4 bytes.
Default = turn-on = 4 bytes.
.PP
The word size value does not matter for checking
standard-conforming programs that do not declare explicit precisions for
non-character variables or store Hollerith data in variables.  This
setting also does not affect the default size of character variables,
which is always 1 byte.  Hollerith constants also are assumed to
occupy 1 byte per character.
.PP
The word size is used to determine whether truncation occurs in
assignment statements, and to catch precision mismatches in subprogram
argument lists and common block lists.  The exact warnings that are
issued will depend on the status of other flags.  Under both the
\fB\-portability=mixed\-size\fP and the \fB\-nowordsize\fP flag, any mixing of
explicit with default precision objects (character
expressions not included) is warned about.  This applies to arithmetic
expressions containing both types of objects, and to
subprogram arguments and COMMON variables.
Under control of the \fB\-truncation=demotion\fP and
\fBpromotion\fP options, a warning
is given for assignment of an expression to a shorter variable of the
same type, or for promotion of a lower precision value to higher
precision in an arithmetic expression or an assignment statement.
.PP
Giving a word size of 0, or equivalently, using \fB\-nowordsize\fP means that
no default value will be assumed.
This is equivalent to specifying
\fB\-portability=mixed\-size\fP.
Use it to find cases of mixing default and explicit
precision, for example to flag places where REAL*8 is treated
as equivalent to DOUBLE PRECISION.
.PP
See also: \fB\-pointersize\fP, \fB\-portability\fP, \fB\-truncation\fP.
.RE

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
3 /wrap=col
.PP
\}
.el \{
.TP
.BI \-wrap= col
\}
Controls the wrapping of error messages.  Long error
messages that would run past the specified column will be broken up into
separate lines between the words of the message for better
readability.  If turned off with \fB\-nowrap\fP, each separate error
message will be printed on one line, leaving it up to the display to
wrap the message or truncate it.  Default = turn-on = 79.

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
2 Changing_the_defaults
.PP
\}
.el \{
.SH "CHANGING THE DEFAULTS"
\}
\fBftnchek\fP includes two mechanisms for changing the
default values of all options:
by defining environment variables
or by creating a preferences file.
When \fBftnchek\fP starts up,
it looks in its environment for any variables whose names are composed by
prefixing the string
\fCFTNCHEK_\fR
onto the uppercased version of the option
name.  If such a
variable is found, its value is used to specify the default for the
corresponding switch or setting.  In the case of settings (for example,
the \fB\-common\fP strictness setting)
the value of the environment variable is read as the
default setting value.  In the case of switches, the default switch will
be taken as true or yes unless the environment variable has the value
\fC0\fR or \fCNO\fR.
.PP
Note that the environment variable name must be constructed with the
full-length option name, which must be in uppercase.  For example, to
make
\fBftnchek\fP print a source listing by default, set the environment
variable
\fCFTNCHEK_LIST\fR
to \fC1\fR or \fCYES\fR or anything other than \fC0\fR or \fCNO\fR.
The names
\fCFTNCHEK_LIS\fR
(not the full option name) or
\fCftnchek_list\fR
(lower case) would not be recognized.
.ie \nh \{
The way to set the environment variables on the VMS system is by
using the DEFINE command.  For example, to set the default /list
switch to YES, give the command
.sp 1
.ti 5
     $ DEFINE FTNCHEK_LIST 1
\}
.el \{
.PP
Here are some examples of how to set environment variables on various
systems.  For simplicity, all the examples set the default \fB\-list\fP
switch to \fCYES\fR.
.PP
.\" groff gives bad alignment on case 1 and I haven't found a workaround
.fc > @
.if n .ta 30 +30
.if t .ta 2i +3i
>1. UNIX, Bourne shell:  >\fC$ FTNCHEK_LIST=YES\fR
.\" groff gives bad alignment here and I haven't found a workaround
.br
>                        >\fC$ export FTNCHEK_LIST\fR

>2. UNIX, C shell:       >\fC% setenv FTNCHEK_LIST YES\fR

>3. VAX/VMS:             >\fC$ DEFINE FTNCHEK_LIST YES\fR

>4. MSDOS:               >\fC$ SET FTNCHEK_LIST=YES\fR
.fc
\}
.PP
After processing any environment variables, ftnchek looks for a
preferences file containing options and settings.
It will search in the following order, using only the
first file found: (1) \fI.\|ftnchekrc\fP in the current directory, (2)
\fIftnchek.\|ini\fP in the current directory, (3) \fI.\|ftnchekrc\fP in
the user's home directory, (4) \fIftnchek.\|ini\fP in the home
directory.  If such a file is found, the options defined in it are
used as defaults in place of the built-in defaults and overriding any
defaults set in the environment..
.PP
Each option or setting in the preferences file must be on a separate
line.  They are given in the same form as on the command line, except
without the initial
.ie \nh slash.
.el dash.
The preferences file can contain blank lines and comments.  Comments
are introduced at any point in a line by a space character (blank or
tab) or the '#' character, and are terminated by the end of the line.
.PP
Command-line options override the defaults set in the environment
or in the preferences file, in  the same way as they
override the built-in defaults.

.ie \nh \{
.in 0
2 Project_files
.PP
\}
.el \{
.SH "USING PROJECT FILES"
\}
This section contains detailed information on how to use project files
most effectively, and how to avoid some pitfalls.
.PP
NOTE: project files were designed for Fortran 77 code and do not work
correctly for program units containing or using modules.  There are no
plans to upgrade them to do so.  Modules provide all the benefits of
project files and more besides, so if you are writing new Fortran code
that uses modules you should not need project files.  (You can still
make and use project files for any source files that do not define or
use modules themselves.  For instance, if your own code uses modules
but calls external procedures in a library written in Fortran
77, you can make a project file of the latter and include it along
with your own source for input to ftnchek.)
.PP
One can divide the checks
\fBftnchek\fP does into two categories, local and global.  Local
checking is restricted to within a single routine,
and catches things like uninitialized variables, unintended loss
of precision in arithmetic expressions, etc.  This sort of checking
can be done on each subprogram independently.  Furthermore,
local checking of a subprogram does not need to be repeated when some other
subprogram is changed.  Global checking catches things like calling a
subroutine with the wrong argument types, or disagreeing in common
block declarations.  It requires looking at the whole set of subprograms
interacting with each other.
.PP
The purpose of project files is to allow the local checking and global
checking steps to be separated.  Assuming that each subprogram is in
its own source file, you can run \fBftnchek\fP once on each one to do local
checking while suppressing global checking.
Then \fBftnchek\fP can be run once on all the project
files together to do the global checking.  The sample makefile below
shows how to automate this task.  The ``\fC.f.prj\fR'' target updates a
project file for a particular file any time the source file changes.
The information needed for global checking is saved
in the project file.
The ``\fCcheck\fR'' target does the combined global checking.
Typically ``\fCmake check\fR'' would repeat the ``\fCftnchek
-project\fR'' step only on changed source
files, then do the global check.  This is obviously a big advantage
for large programs, when many subprograms seldom if ever change.
.PP
It is best when using project files to place each subprogram
in a separate source file.  If each source file may contain more than one
subprogram,  it complicates the definition of ``local'' and ``global''
checking because there is some inter-program unit checking that is contained
within a file.  \fBftnchek\fP tries to do the right thing in this
case, but there are some complications (described below) due to the
trade-off between avoiding re-doing cross-checks and preserving
information about the program's structure.
.PP
Ordinarily, to do the least amount of re-checking, project files should be
created with the \fB\-library\fP
flag in effect and trimming turned on.  In this mode,
the information saved in the project file consists of all subprogram
declarations, all subprogram invocations not resolved by declarations in the
same file, and one instance of each COMMON
block declaration.  This is the minimum amount of information needed
to check agreement between files.
.PP
If the source file contains more than one routine, there are some
possible problems that can arise from creating the project file in
library mode, because the calling
hierarchy among routines defined within the file is lost.  Also,
if the routines in the file make use of COMMON
blocks that are shared with routines in other files, there will not be
enough information saved for the correct checking of set and used
status of COMMON blocks and COMMON variables according to the
\fB\-usage\fP setting.  Therefore if
you plan to use project files when \fB\-usage\fP
checking is turned on (which is the default situation), and if
multiple routines in one
project file share COMMON blocks with routines in other files,
the project files
should be created with the \fB\-library\fP flag turned off.
In this mode, \fBftnchek\fP saves, besides
the information listed above, one invocation of each subprogram by
any other subprogram in the same file, and all COMMON block
declarations.  This means that the project file will be larger than
necessary, and that when it is read in, \fBftnchek\fP may repeat some
inter-program unit checks that it already did when the project file was
created.  If each project file contains only one
program unit, there is no loss of information in creating the project
files in library mode.
.PP
Because of the possible loss of information entailed by creating a project file
with the \fB\-library\fP flag in effect, whenever that project file is read
in later, it will be treated as a library file regardless of the
current setting of the \fB\-library\fP flag.  On the other hand, a project
file created with library mode turned off can be read in later in either
mode.
.PP
The foregoing discussion assumes that the trimming options of the
\fB\-project\fP setting are turned on when the project file is
created.  This is the normal situation.  The \fBno\-trim\fP options of
the \fB\-project\fP setting are provided in case one wants to use the
project files for purposes other than checking the program with
\fBftnchek\fP.  For instance, one could write a Perl script to analyze
the project files for information about how the different subprograms
are called.  You should not use the \fBno\-trim\fP options to deal
with the issues of information loss discussed above, since they cause
more information than necessary to be stored.  This makes the project
files bigger and causes \fBftnchek\fP to do more work later when it reads
them to check your complete program.  Ordinarily, you should use the
\fB\-library\fP option to control how much information to store for
later use by \fBftnchek\fP in checking your program.
.if !\nh \{
.PP
Here is an example of how to use the UNIX \fBmake\fP utility to
automatically create a new project file each time the corresponding
source file is altered, and to check the set of files for consistency.
Add these lines to your \fCmakefile\fR.
The example assumes that a macro \fCOBJS\fR has been defined which
lists all the names of object files to be linked together to form the
complete executable program.
(In this \fCmakefile\fR, the indented lines should each begin with a
tab, not blanks.)
If any source file contains multiple routines that share
common blocks among themselves, then the \fCno-com-\\*\fR option
should be removed from \fCNOGLOBAL\fR, and/or drop the \fC-library\fR flag.
.nf
\fC
    # tell make what a project file suffix is
    .SUFFIXES: .prj

    # these options suppress global checks.
    NOGLOBAL=-usage=no-ext-undefined,no-com-\\*

    # tell make how to create a .prj file from a .f file
    .f.prj:
            ftnchek -project $(NOGLOBAL) -library $<

    # set up macro PRJS containing project filenames
    PRJS= $(OBJS:.o=.prj)

    # "make check" will check everything that has been changed.
    check: $(PRJS)
            ftnchek $(PRJS)
\fR
.fi
.PP
When a program uses many routines defined in a large number of
different source files in different directories, it can be
cumbersome to specify all the different project files needed to check
the program properly.  To deal with such cases, \fBftnchek\fP allows
project files to be concatenated into a single large file.  This
single file can then be given to \fBftnchek\fP to provide the
information for checking the use of any or all of the routines defined
in the combined project files.  When using such a ``library''
project file, you may want \fBftnchek\fP's error reports to document
precisely the name of the file where the specific function is defined.
If the various source files are in several directories,
an error report that gives only the file name may be ambiguous, and rather
should include the path to the file.  The solution is to create
each of the individual project files by giving the complete path to
the source file.  Then this complete path will appear in the error
reports.  For example, suppose that all of the library subprogram
source files are in subdirectories of a directory named
\fC/util/lib\fR.  Then the individual project files
could first be created by a command such as
.nf
\fC
find /util/lib -name '*.f' -exec ftnchek -project '{}' ';'
\fR
.fi
(Possibly other options would be provided to \fBftnchek\fP as
discussed above.  Also, this step could be handled instead by a
revised \fCmakefile\fR rule that would provide the complete
source file path instead of just the local name when invoking
\fBftnchek\fP.)  Next, concatenate all of these project files manually.
.nf
\fC
find /util/lib -name '*.prj' -exec cat '{}' ';' > ourlib.prj
\fR
.fi
Then a program source file can be checked by using the command
.nf
\fC
ftnchek prog.f ... -lib ourlib.prj
\fR
.fi
and an error message related to any library routine will include
the full path to the routine's source file.
.PP
At present, there is no archive utility like \fBar\fR to manage the
contents of a concatenated project file like the one in the
illustration above.  If changes are made to one of the library
routines, the only way to update the combined project file is to
concatenate all the individual project files once again.  Such a
utility would be quite easy to write.  Someone should do so and
contribute it to the \fBftnchek\fP effort.
\}
.if \nh \{
.\" ---End of section used in VMS HELP documentation---
.ex
\}
.SH "AN EXAMPLE"
The following simple Fortran program illustrates the messages given by
\fBftnchek\fP.
The program is intended to accept an array of test scores
and then compute the average for the series.
.PP
.nf
\fC
.so average.f
\fR
.fi
.PP
The compiler gives no error messages when this program is compiled.
Yet here is what happens when it is run:
.PP
.nf
\fC
$ run average
70
90
85
<EOF>
$
\fR
.fi
.PP
What happened?  Why didn't the program do anything?
The following is the output from
\fBftnchek\fP when it is used to debug the above
program:

.PP
.nf
\fC

$ ftnchek -list -symtab average
.so average.out
\fR
.fi
.PP
According to \fBftnchek\fP,
the program contains variables which may be
used before they are assigned an initial value, and variables which
are not needed.  \fBftnchek\fP also warns the user that an integer
quotient has been converted to a real. This may assist the user in
catching an unintended roundoff error.  Since the \fB\-symtab\fP flag
was given, \fBftnchek\fP prints out a table containing identifiers from
the local program unit and their corresponding datatype and number of
dimensions.  Finally, \fBftnchek\fP warns that the function
\fCCOMPAV\fR is not used
with the proper type of arguments.
.PP
With \fBftnchek\fP's
help, we can debug the program.  We can see that there
were the following errors:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
1.
\fCSUM\fR and \fCCOUNT\fR
should have been converted to real before doing the division.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
2.
\fCSUM\fR should have been initialized to 0 before entering the loop.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
3.
\fCAVG\fR was never printed out after being calculated.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
4.
\fCNUMS\fR should have been declared INTEGER
instead of REAL.
.PP
We also see that \fCI\fR, not \fCJ\fR, should have been declared
INTEGER in function \fCCOMPAV\fR. Also, \fCMAXNOS\fR was not
declared as INTEGER, nor \fCCOMPAV\fR as REAL, in
program \fCAVENUM\fR.  These are not errors, but they may indicate
carelessness.  As it happened, the default type of these variables
coincided with the intended type.
.PP
Here is the corrected program, and its output when run:
.PP
.nf
\fC
.so correct.f
$ run average
70
90
85
<EOF>
AVERAGE =   81.66666
$
\fR
.fi
.PP
With \fBftnchek\fP's
help, our program is a success!

.SH "INTERPRETING THE OUTPUT"
The messages given by
\fBftnchek\fP include not only
syntax errors but also warnings and informational messages
about things that are legal Fortran but that may indicate errors or
carelessness.
Most of these messages can be turned off by
command-line options.  Which option controls each message
depends on
the nature of the condition being warned about.  See the
descriptions of the command-line flags in the previous sections,
and of individual messages below.
Each message is prefixed with a word or phrase indicating the nature
of the condition and its severity.
.PP
NOTE: this section formerly attempted to list all of \fBftnchek\fP's
warnings and error messages.  There are now far too many to document
each.  Hopefully the examples given here will provide enough guidance
for you to interpret all of the messages you may see.
.PP
``Error'' means a syntax error.  The simplest
kind of syntax errors are typographical errors, for example unbalanced
parentheses or misspelling of a keyword.  This type of error is caught
by the parser and appears with the description ``parse error'' or
``syntax error'' (depending on  the version of the parser generator and whether
it is GNU \fBbison\fP or UNIX \fByacc\fP).
This type of error message cannot be
suppressed.  Be aware that this type of error often means
that \fBftnchek\fP has not properly interpreted the statement where the
error occurs, so that its subsequent checking operations will be
compromised.  You should eliminate all syntax errors before proceeding to
interpret the other messages \fBftnchek\fP gives.
.PP
``Warning: Nonstandard syntax'' indicates an extension to Fortran that
\fBftnchek\fP supports but that is not according to the Fortran 77 or
Fortran 90 Standard.
The extensions that \fBftnchek\fP accepts
are described in the section on Extensions below.
These are typically features supported by many compilers even though
they are not standard.
One example is the TYPE output statement.
If a program uses these extensions, warnings will be
given according to specifications under the \fB\-f77\fP and
\fB\-f90\fP settings.
The default behavior is to give no warnings.
.PP
``Warning'' in other cases
means a condition that is suspicious but that may or may not
be a programming error.  Frequently these conditions are legal under
the standard.  Some are illegal but do not fall under the heading
of syntax errors.
Usage errors are one example.
These refer to the possibility that a variable may be used before
it has been assigned a value (generally an error),
or that a variable is declared but never used (harmless but may
indicate carelessness).
The amount of checking for usage errors is controlled by
the \fB\-usage\fP flag, which specifies
the maximum amount of checking by default.
.PP
Truncation warnings cover situations in which accuracy may be lost
unintentionally, for example when a double precision value is assigned
to a real variable.  These warnings are controlled by the
\fB\-truncation\fP setting, which is on by default.
.PP
``Nonportable usage'' warns about some feature that may not be
accepted by some compilers even though it is not contrary
to the Fortran Standard, or that may cause the program to perform
differently on different platforms.
For example, equivalencing real
and integer variables is usually a non-portable practice.
The use of extensions to the standard language is, of course, another
source of non-portability, but this is handled as a separate case.  To
check a program for true portability, both the \fB\-portability\fP and
the \fB\-f90\fP flags should be used.  They are both turned off by
default.  The \fB\-wordsize\fP setting is provided to check only those
nonportable usages that depend on a particular machine wordsize.
.PP
``Possibly misleading appearance'' is used for legal constructions that may not
mean what they appear to mean at first glance.  For example,
in fixed-form Fortran source
blank spaces are not significant, so extraneous space within variable names
or the lack of space between a keyword and a variable can convey the wrong
impression to the reader.
These messages can be suppressed by turning off the \fB\-pretty\fP
flag, which is on by default.
.PP
Other messages that are given after all the files are processed,
and having to do with agreement between program units, do not use the word
``warning'' but generally fall into that category.
Examples include type mismatches between corresponding variables in
different COMMON
block declarations, or between dummy and actual arguments of a
subprogram.
These warnings are controlled by the \fB\-common\fP and
\fB\-arguments\fP settings respectively.  By default both are set for
maximum strictness of checking.
.PP
Another group of warnings about conditions that are often harmless
refer to cases where the array properties of a variable
passed as a subprogram argument differ between the two routines.
For instance, an array element might be passed to a subroutine that
expects a whole array.  This is a commonly-used technique for
processing single rows or columns of two-dimensional arrays.
However, it could also indicate a programming error.  The
\fB\-array\fP setting allows the user to adjust the degree of
strictness to be used in checking this kind of agreement between
actual and dummy array arguments.  By default
the strictness is maximum.
.PP
``Oops'' indicates a technical
problem, meaning either a bug in \fBftnchek\fP or that its resources have
been exceeded.
.PP
The syntax error messages and warnings include
the filename along with the line number and column
number.  \fBftnchek\fP has two different options for the
appearance of these error messages.  If \fB\-novice\fP is in effect,
which is the default,
the messages are in a style approximating
normal English.  (In default style, the filename is
not printed in messages within the body of the program if \fB\-list\fP is in
effect.)  The other style of error messages is selected by the
\fB\-nonovice\fP option.  In this
style, the appearance of the messages is similar to that of the
UNIX \fBlint\fP program.
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP is still blind to some kinds of errors.
The most important one is detailed checking of FORMAT statements
against their I/O lists.  But there are many others that any compiler
will catch.  Our efforts have always been concentrated on producing
warnings about errors that compilers typically do not warn about.
See the section on Limitations for a more detailed discussion.
.PP
If \fBftnchek\fP gives you a syntax error message when the compiler does
not, it may be because your program contains an extension to
standard Fortran which is accepted by the compiler but not by
\fBftnchek\fP.  (See the section on Extensions.)
On a VAX/VMS system, you can use the compiler option \fC/STANDARD\fR
to cause the compiler to accept only standard Fortran.
On most UNIX or UNIX-like systems, this can be accomplished by
setting the flag \fB\-ansi.\fP  The \fBgfortran\fP(1) compiler from
the GNU project accepts a flag \fB\-std=f95\fP to enforce compliance
with Fortran 95.
.PP
Many of the messages given by \fBftnchek\fP are self-explanatory.
Those that need some additional explanation are listed below in
alphabetical order.
.TP
.I "Common block NAME: data type mismatch at position n"
The \fIn\fP-th variable in the COMMON block differs in data type
in two different declarations of the COMMON block.  By default
(\fB\-common\fP strictness level 3), \fBftnchek\fP is very picky about
COMMON blocks: the variables listed in them must match exactly
by data type and array dimensions.  That is, the legal pair of
declarations in different program units:
.nf
\fC     COMMON /COM1/ A,B\fR
and
\fC     COMMON /COM1/ A(2)\fR
.fi
.br
will cause \fBftnchek\fP to give warnings at strictness level 3.  These
two declarations are legal in Fortran since they both declare two real
variables.  At strictness level 1 or 2, no warning would be given in
this example, but the warning would
be given if there were a data type mismatch, for instance, if \fCB\fR
were declared INTEGER.
Controlled by \fB\-common\fP setting.

.TP
.I "Common block NAME has long data type following short data type"
Some compilers require alignment of multi-byte items so that each item
begins at an address that is a multiple of the item size.  Thus if a
short (e.g. single-precision real) item is followed by a long (e.g.
double precision real) item, the latter may not be aligned correctly.
Controlled by \fB\-portability=common\-alignment\fP option.

.TP
.I "Common block NAME has mixed character and non-character variables"
The ANSI Fortran 77 standard requires that if any variable in a COMMON
block is of type CHARACTER, then all other variables in the
same COMMON block must also be of type CHARACTER.
In Fortran 90 this requirement is relaxed, so long as corresponding
storage locations have the same type.
Controlled by \fB\-f77=f90\fP option.

.TP
.I "Common block NAME: varying length"
For \fB\-common\fP setting level 2, this message means that
a COMMON block is declared to have different numbers of words in two
different subprograms.  A word is the amount of storage occupied by
one integer or real variable.
For \fB\-common\fP setting level 3, it means that the two declarations
have different numbers of variables, where an array of any size is
considered one variable.
This is not
necessarily an error, but it may indicate that a variable is missing
from one of the lists.  Note that according to the Fortran 77 Standard,
it is an error for named COMMON blocks (but not blank COMMON) to differ
in number of words in declarations in different program units.
Given for \fB\-common\fP setting 2 or 3.

.TP
.I "Error: Badly formed logical/relational operator or constant"
.TP
.I "Error: Badly formed real constant"
The syntax analyzer has found the start of
one of the special words that begin and
end with a period (e.g. \fC.EQ.\fR), or the start of a numeric constant,
but did not succeed in finding a complete item of that kind.

.TP
.I "Error: cannot be adjustable size in prog unit NAME"
A character variable cannot be declared with a size that is an
asterisk in parentheses unless it is a dummy argument, a parameter, or
the name of the function defined in the program unit.

.TP
.I "Error: cannot be declared in SAVE statement in prog unit NAME"
Only local variables and common blocks can be declared in a
SAVE statement.

.TP
.I "Error: No path to this statement"
\fBftnchek\fP will detect statements which are ignored or by-passed because
there is no foreseeable route to the statement.  For example, an
unnumbered statement (a statement without a statement label), occurring
immediately after a GOTO
statement, cannot possibly be executed.

.TP
.I "Error: Parse error"
This means that the parser, which analyzes the Fortran
program into expressions,
statements, etc., has been unable to find a valid interpretation for some
portion of a statement in the program.  If your compiler does not report a
syntax error at the same place, the most common explanations are: (1) use of an
extension to ANSI standard Fortran that is not recognized by
\fBftnchek\fP, or (2) the statement requires more lookahead than
\fBftnchek\fP uses (see section on Bugs).
.IP
NOTE: This message means that the affected statement is not interpreted.
Therefore, it is possible that \fBftnchek\fP's
subsequent processing will be in error, if it depends on any matters
affected by this statement (type declarations, etc.).

.TP
.I "Error: Syntax error"
This is the same as ``Error: Parse error'' (see above).  It is generated
if your version of \fBftnchek\fP was built using the UNIX \fByacc\fP
parser generator rather than GNU \fBbison\fP.

.TP
.I "Identifiers which are not unique in first six chars"
Warns that two identifiers which are longer than 6 characters do not
differ in the first 6 characters.  This is for portability: they may not
be considered distinct by some compilers.
Controlled by \fB\-sixchar\fP option.

.TP
.I "Nonportable usage: argument precision may not be correct for intrinsic function"
The precision of an argument passed to an intrinsic function may be
incorrect on some computers.  Issued when a numeric variable declared
with explicit precision (e.g.  \fCREAL*8 X\fR) is passed to a
specific intrinsic function (e.g. \fCDSQRT(X)\fR).
Controlled by \fB\-portability=mixed\-size\fP and \fB\-wordsize\fP.

.TP
.I "Nonportable usage: character constant/variable length exceeds 255"
Some compilers do not support character strings more than 255
characters in length.
Controlled by \fB\-portability=long\-string\fP.

.TP
.I "Nonportable usage: File contains tabs"
\fBftnchek\fP expands tabs to be equivalent to spaces up to the next column
which is a multiple of 8.  Some compilers treat tabs differently, and
also it is possible that files sent by electronic mail will have the tabs
converted to blanks in some way.  Therefore files containing tabs may not
be compiled correctly after being transferred.  \fBftnchek\fP does not give
this message if tabs only occur within comments or character constants.
Controlled by \fB\-portability=tab\fP.

.TP
.I "Nonportable usage: non-integer DO loop bounds"
This warning is only given when the DO index and bounds are
non-integer.
Use of non-integer quantities in a DO statement may cause
unexpected errors, or different results on different machines, due to
roundoff effects.
Controlled by \fB\-portability=real\-do\fP.

.TP
.I "Possibly it is an array which was not declared"
This message is appended to warnings related to
a function invocation or to an argument type
mismatch, for which the possibility exists that what appears to be a
function is actually meant to be an array.  If the programmer forgot to
dimension an array, references to the array will be interpreted as
function invocations.  This message will be suppressed if the name in
question appears in an EXTERNAL or INTRINSIC statement.
Controlled by the \fB\-novice\fP option.

.TP
.I "Possibly misleading appearance: characters past 72 columns"
The program is being processed with the statement field width at its
standard value of 72, and some nonblank characters have been found
past column 72.  In this case,
\fBftnchek\fP is not processing the characters past column 72, and is
notifying the user that the statement may not have the meaning that it
appears to have.  These characters might be intended by the programmer to be
significant, but they will be ignored by the compiler.  Controlled by
\fB\-pretty=long\-line\fP.

.TP
.I "Possibly misleading appearance: Common block declared in more than one statement"
Such multiple declarations are legal and have the same effect as
a continuation of the original declaration of the block.
This warning is only given if the two declarations are separated by
one or more intervening statements.
Controlled by \fB\-pretty=multiple\-common\fP.

.TP
.I "Possibly misleading appearance: Continuation follows comment or blank line"
\fBftnchek\fP issues this warning message to alert the user that a
continuation of a statement is interspersed with comments, making it easy
to overlook.
Controlled by \fB\-pretty=continuation\fP.

.TP
.I "Possibly misleading appearance: Extraneous parentheses"
Warns about parentheses surrounding a variable by itself in an
expression.  When a parenthesized variable is passed as an argument to
a subprogram, it is treated as an expression, not as a variable whose
value can be modified by the called routine.
Controlled by \fB\-pretty=parentheses\fP.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME: argument data type mismatch at position n"
The subprogram's
\fIn\fP-th actual argument (in the CALL or the
usage of a function) differs in datatype or precision from the \fIn\fP-th dummy
argument (in the SUBROUTINE or FUNCTION
declaration).  For instance, if the user defines a
subprogram by
.nf
\fC     SUBROUTINE SUBA(X)\fR
\fC     REAL X\fR
.fi
and elsewhere invokes SUBA by
.nf
\fC     CALL SUBA(2)\fR
.fi
.br
\fBftnchek\fP will detect the error.  The reason here
is that the number 2 is integer, not real.  The user should have written
.nf
\fC     CALL SUBA(2.0)\fR
.fi
.IP
When checking an argument which is a subprogram, \fBftnchek\fP must be
able to determine whether it is a function or a subroutine.  The rules
used by \fBftnchek\fP to do this are as follows: If the subprogram,
besides being passed as an actual argument, is also invoked directly
elsewhere in the same program unit, then its type is determined by that
usage.  If not, then if the name of the subprogram does not appear in
an explicit type declaration, it is assumed to be a subroutine; if it
is explicitly typed it is taken as a function.  Therefore, subroutines
passed as actual arguments need only be declared by an EXTERNAL
statement in the calling program unit, whereas functions must also be
explicitly typed in order to avoid generating this error message.
Controlled by \fB\-arguments\fP setting.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME: argument arrayness mismatch at position n"
Similar to the preceding situation, but
the subprogram dummy argument differs from the corresponding actual
argument in its number of dimensions or number of elements.
Controlled by \fB\-array\fP together with \fB\-arguments\fP settings.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME: argument mismatch at position n"
A character dummy argument is larger than the corresponding actual
argument, or a Hollerith dummy argument is larger than the
corresponding actual argument.  Controlled by \fB\-arguments\fP setting.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME: argument usage mismatch"
\fBftnchek\fP detects a possible conflict between the way a subprogram uses
an argument and the way in which the argument is supplied to the
subprogram.  The conflict can be one of two types, as outlined below.

.TP
.if n .ti +3
.if t .ti +.3i
.I "Dummy arg is modified, Actual arg is const or expr"
A dummy argument is an argument as named in a SUBROUTINE or
FUNCTION statement and used within the subprogram.  An actual
argument is an argument as passed to a subroutine or function by the
caller.  \fBftnchek\fP is saying that a dummy argument is modified by
the subprogram, implying that its value is changed in the calling program unit.
The corresponding actual argument should not be a constant or
expression, but rather a variable or array element which can be
legitimately assigned to.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=arg\-const\-modified\fP option.

.TP
.if n .ti +3
.if t .ti +.3i
.I "Dummy arg used before set, Actual arg not set"
Here a dummy argument may be used in the subprogram
before having a value assigned to it by the subprogram.  The
corresponding actual argument should have a value assigned to it by the
caller prior to invoking the subprogram.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=var\-uninitialized\fP option.
.IP
This warning is not affected by the \fB\-arguments\fP setting.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME invoked inconsistently"
Here the mismatch is between the datatype of the subprogram itself as
used and as defined. For instance, if the user declares
.nf
\fC     INTEGER FUNCTION COUNT(A)\fR
.fi
and invokes \fCCOUNT\fR in another subprogram as
.nf
\fC     N = COUNT(A)\fR
.fi
.br
without declaring its datatype, it will default to real type, based on
the first letter of its name.  The calling subprogram should have included
the declaration
.nf
\fC     INTEGER COUNT\fR
.fi
.IP
Given for \fB\-arguments\fP setting 2 or 3.

.TP
.I "Subprogram NAME:  varying length argument lists:"
An inconsistency has been found between the number of dummy arguments
(parameters) a subprogram has and the number of actual arguments given it
in an invocation.
\fBftnchek\fP keeps track of all invocations of subprograms
(CALL
statements and expressions using functions) and compares them with
the definitions of the subprograms elsewhere in the source code.  The
Fortran compiler normally does not catch this type of error.
Given for \fB\-arguments\fP setting 1 or 3.

.TP
.I "Variable not declared.  Type has been implicitly defined"
When printing the symbol table for a program unit,
\fBftnchek\fP will flag with an asterisk
all identifiers that are not explicitly typed
and will show the datatype that was assigned through implicit typing.
This provides support for users who wish to declare all variables as
is required in Pascal or some other languages.
This message appears only when the \fB\-symtab\fP option is in effect.
Alternatively, use the \fB\-declare\fP flag if you want to get a list of all
undeclared variables.

.TP
.I "Variables declared but never referenced"
Detects any identifiers that were declared in your program but were
never used, either to be assigned a value or to have their value
accessed.  Variables in COMMON are excluded.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=var\-unused\fP option.

.TP
.I "Variables set but never used"
\fBftnchek\fP will notify the user when a variable has been assigned a
value, but the variable is not otherwise used in the program.  Usually
this results from an oversight.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=var\-set\-unused\fP option.

.TP
.I "Variables used before set"
This message indicates that an identifier is used to compute a value
prior to its initialization.  Such usage may lead to an incorrect value
being computed, since its initial value is not controlled.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=var\-uninitialized\fP option.

.TP
.I "Variables may be used before set"
Similar to used before set except that \fBftnchek\fP is not able to
determine its status with certainty.  \fBftnchek\fP assumes a variable
may be used before set if the first usage of the variable occurs prior
in the program text to its assignment.
Controlled by the \fB\-usage=var\-uninitialized\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: DO index is not integer"
This warning is only given when the DO bounds are integer, but
the DO index is not.  It may indicate a failure to declare the
index to be an integer.
Controlled by \fB\-truncation=real\-do\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: integer quotient expr ... converted to real"
The quotient of two integers results in an integer type result, in
which the fractional part is dropped.  If such an integer expression
involving division is later converted to a real datatype, it may be that
a real type division had been intended.
Controlled by \fB\-truncation=int\-div\-real\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: Integer quotient expr ... used in exponent"
The quotient of two integers results in an integer type result, in
which the fractional part is dropped.  If such an integer expression
is used as an exponent, it is quite likely that a real type division was
intended.
Controlled by \fB\-truncation=int\-div\-exponent\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: NAME not set when RETURN encountered"
The way that functions in Fortran return a value is by assigning the
value to the name of the function.  This message indicates that the
function was not assigned a value before the point where a
RETURN statement was found.  Therefore it is possible that the
function could return an undefined value.

.TP
.I "Warning: Nonstandard syntax: adjustable size cannot be concatenated here"
The Fortran 77 Standard (sec. 6.2.2) forbids concatenating character variables
whose size is an asterisk in parentheses, except in an assignment
statement.   Controlled by \fB\-f77=mixed\-expr\fP.

.TP
.I "Warning: Nonstandard syntax : significant characters past 72 columns"
This warning is given under the \fB\-f77=long\-line\fP setting if the
\fB\-columns\fP setting has been used to increase the statement field width,
and a statement has meaningful program text beyond column 72.
Standard fixed-form Fortran ignores all text in those columns, but some compilers
do not.  Thus the program may be treated differently by different
compilers.

.TP
.I "Warning: Nonstandard syntax : Statement out of order."
\fBftnchek\fP will detect statements that are out of the
sequence specified for ANSI standard Fortran 77.  Table 1 illustrates the
allowed sequence of statements in the Fortran language.  Statements which are
out of order are nonetheless interpreted by
\fBftnchek\fP,
to prevent ``cascades'' of error messages.
The sequence counter is also rolled back to prevent
repetition of the error message for a block of similar statements.
Controlled by the \fB\-f77=statement\-order\fP option.
.IP
.nf
.if n .ne 11
.if t .ne 1.75i
\fC
--------------------------------------------------------
                  |               | implicit
                  |  parameter    |---------------------
                  |               | other specification
        format    |---------------|---------------------
         and      |               | statement-function
        entry     |  data         |---------------------
                  |               | executable
--------------------------------------------------------

                      \fRTable 1\fP
\fR
.fi

.TP
.I "Warning: Possible division by zero"
This message is printed out wherever division is done (except division
by a constant).  Use it to
help locate a runtime division by zero problem.
Controlled by \fB\-division\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: real truncated to intg"
\fBftnchek\fP has detected an assignment statement which has a real
expression on the right, but an integer variable on the left.  The
fractional part of the real value will be lost.  If you explicitly
convert the real expression to integer using the INT or
NINT intrinsic function, no warning will be printed.  A similar
message is printed if a double precision expression is assigned to a
single precision variable, etc.
Controlled by \fB\-truncation=demotion\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: subscript is not integer"
Since array subscripts are normally integer quantities, the use of a
non-integer expression here may signal an error.
Controlled by \fB\-truncation=real\-subscript\fP option.

.TP
.I "Warning: Unknown intrinsic function"
This message warns the user that a name declared in an
INTRINSIC statement is unknown to \fBftnchek\fP.  Probably it is
a nonstandard intrinsic function, and so the program will not be
portable.  The function will be treated by \fBftnchek\fP as a
user-defined function.  This warning is not suppressed by any
option, since it affects \fBftnchek\fP's analysis of
the program.  However, if the intrinsic function is in one of the
supported sets of nonstandard intrinsics, you can use the
\fB\-intrinsic\fP setting to cause \fBftnchek\fP to recognize it.

.SH "LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS"

.PP
\fBftnchek\fP now accepts ANSI standard Fortran 95 programs with 
a few exceptions and some common non-standard extensions.  It still
accepts Fortran 77 conforming code, even if it contains features
deleted in Fortran 95.  The behavior of \fBftnchek\fP on Fortran 77
source code is unchanged from the previous version, 3.3.1, apart from
some minor wording changes on messages.
.TP
.BR  Limitations :
.RS
INTERFACE statements, generic functions, overloaded operators, and
user-defined operators are not yet supported.  \fBftnchek\fP parses
these elements but does not interpret them, so many bogus error
messages can be expected for programs that use them.  Supporting these
language elements is a high priority and should be completed shortly.
.PP
Optional arguments in user-defined functions are not supported.  They
will generate warnings about inconsistency between function call and
definition.  In intrinsic functions, keyword forms of actual arguments
(e.g. \fCREAL(A=X,KIND=DP)\fP) are parsed but matching of keyword to
dummy argument for type checking is not yet done.  This implies that
the standard order of arguments must still be followed even using
keywords.  This is especially important when using intrinsics that are
evaluated in parameter declarations and that take optional arguments.
For instance, to specify a range R with SELECTED_REAL_KIND, it is
necessary to include the precision P as the first argument.  This
defect is expected to be fixed very soon.
.PP
When tracking array-valued expressions, the detailed shape of arrays
is not recorded, only the overall length.  When \fBftnchek\fP cannot
determine whether the size of an array or array section does not match
another array-valued object in an expression or assignment, it assumes
it is OK and does not issue a warning.  Thus some shape mismatches may
be missed.  Storing array shapes is a high priority for a future
version of \fBftnchek\fP.
.PP
Related to this, array-valued constants are not stored.  Thus if an
array constructor is used as the SHAPE argument in RESHAPE,
\fBftnchek\fP will not be able to determine the shape of the result.
We plan to have \fBftnchek\fP store array-valued parameters whose
values are compile-time integer constants.
.PP
NAMELISTs in modules do not get exported.  This defect should be fixed
soon.
.PP
The dummy arguments in statement functions are treated like ordinary
variables of the program.  That is, their scope is the entire subprogram, not
just the statement function definition.
.PP
The checking of FORMAT statements is lax, tolerating missing separators
(comma, etc.) between format descriptors in places where the Standard
requires them, and allowing \fI.\|d\fP fields on descriptors that should
not have them.  It does warn under \fB\-f77=format\-edit\-descr\fP
about nonstandard descriptor types (like
\fCO\fR), and supported extensions.
.PP
If a user-supplied subprogram has the same name as one of the
nonstandard intrinsic functions recognized by \fBftnchek\fP, it must
be declared in an EXTERNAL statement in any routine that invokes
it.  Otherwise it will be subject to the checking normally given to
the intrinsic function.  Since the nonstandard intrinsics are not
standard, this EXTERNAL statement is not required by the Fortran
77 Standard.  Using the \fB\-intrinsic=none\fP setting, recognition of most
nonstandard intrinsics (excepting only those needed to support the
double complex data type) can be turned off.  See the lists of
supported nonstandard intrinsic functions under the discussion of the
\fB\-intrinsic\fP setting above.
.RE
.TP
.BR  Extensions :
.RS
All of these extensions will generate
warnings if the relevant \fB\-f77\fP or \fB\-f90\fP
option is set.
.PP
Tabs are permitted, and translated into equivalent blanks which correspond
to tab stops every 8 columns.  The standard does not recognize tabs.
Note that some compilers allow tabs, but treat them differently.  The
treatment defined for DEC FORTRAN can be achieved using the
\fB\-source=dec\-tab\fP setting.
.PP
Strings may contain UNIX-style backslash escape sequences.  They will
be interpreted as such if the \fB\-source=unix\-backslash\fP setting is given.
Otherwise the backslash character will be treated as a normal
printing character.
.PP
Hollerith constants are permitted, in accordance with the Fortran 77
Standard, appendix C.  According to the standard, they can appear only
in DATA statements and as arguments in subroutine calls.
\fBftnchek\fP also accepts them as function arguments and in assignment
statements.
They should not be used in expressions, or confused
with datatype CHARACTER.
.PP
The letter 'D' (upper or lower case) in column 1 is treated as
the beginning of a comment.  There is no option to treat such lines as
statements instead of comments.
.PP
Statements may be longer than 72 columns provided that the setting
\fB\-columns\fP
was used to increase the limit.  According to the standard, all
text from columns 73 through 80 is ignored, and no line may be longer
than 80 columns.
.PP
Variable names may contain underscores and dollar signs (or other
non-alphabetic characters as specified by the
\fB\-identifier\-chars\fP option).  These characters are
are treated the same as alphabetic letters.  The default type
for variables beginning with these characters is REAL.
In IMPLICIT type statements specifying a range of characters,
the dollar sign follows Z and is followed by underscore.
(Any other user-defined characters are treated the same as the dollar sign.)
Fortran 77 permits only alphanumeric characters in variable names.
Fortran 90 permits underscores as well.
.PP
The UNIX version tolerates the presence of preprocessor directives,
namely lines beginning with the pound sign
(#).
These are treated as comments, except for
\fC#line\fR
directives, which are interpreted, and are used to set the line number
and source file name for warnings and error messages.  Note that
\fC#include\fR
directives are not processed by \fBftnchek\fP.  Programs that use them for
including source files should be passed through the preprocessor
before being input to \fBftnchek\fP.
As noted below, \fBftnchek\fP does process
INCLUDE statements, which have a different syntax.
An optional program, \fBftnpp\fP(1L) (available separately)
provides  preprocessing that properly handles
INCLUDE files.
.PP
The ACCEPT and TYPE statements (for terminal I/O) are
permitted.  ACCEPT uses the same syntax as PRINT.  However, because
TYPE is now used as a keyword for derived-type declarations, a TYPE
output statement may only be of a restricted form that prevents
ambiguity:
.br
.in +3
\fCTYPE\fP \fIformat-id\fP [ \fI, io-list\fP ]
.in -3
.br
Here the \fIformat-id\fP may only be an asterisk, a statement label
(number), or a character literal constant (i.e. a format string within
quotes).
.PP
The so-called ``Cray pointer'' syntax is tolerated. It is not the same as the
Fortran 90 POINTER statement.
The form of this statement is
.br
.in +3
\fCPOINTER (\fR\fIpointer\fP\fC, \fR\fIpointee\fP\fC)\fR
[\fC,(\fR\fIpointer\fP\fC, \fR\fIpointee\fP\fC)\fR]
.in -3
.br
The pointer variables are assigned a data type of \fCINTEGER *4\fR.
Usage checking of the pointee variables is suppressed, since in
practice they are accessed indirectly via the pointers.
.PP
Statements may have any number of continuation lines.  The Fortran 77
and Fortran 90 standards allow a maximum of 19 in fixed source form.
The Fortran 90 standard allows a maximum of 39 in free source form.
.PP
FORMAT statements can contain a dollar sign to indicate suppression of
carriage-return.
An integer expression enclosed in angle brackets can be used anywhere in a
FORMAT statement where
the Fortran Standard allows an integer constant (except for the length of a
Hollerith constant),
to provide a run-time value for a repeat specification or field width.
.PP
Nonstandard keywords are allowed in I/O statements,
corresponding to those in VMS Fortran.
.PP
Data types INTEGER, REAL, COMPLEX, and
LOGICAL are allowed to have an optional nonstandard precision specification in
type declarations.  For instance, \fCREAL*8\fR means an 8-byte
floating point data type.  The \fCREAL*8\fR datatype is not
necessarily considered equivalent to \fCDOUBLE PRECISION\fR,
depending on the \fB\-wordsize\fP setting.
The Fortran 77 Standard allows
a length specification of this form only for CHARACTER data.  The Fortran 90
Standard introduced kind parameters, which should be used to control
the precision and range of numeric variables.
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP supports the DOUBLE COMPLEX type
specification for a complex quantity whose real and imaginary parts
are double precision.  Mixed-mode arithmetic involving
single-precision complex with double-precision real data,
prohibited under the Standard, yields a double complex result.
In Fortran 90, complex quantities may be given a kind parameter
that applies to each of their parts.  By using a kind that corresponds
to double precision, the effect of DOUBLE COMPLEX can be achieved in a
standard conforming way.
.PP
Combined type declarations and data-statement-like initializers are
accepted.  These have the form of a standard Fortran 77 type
declaration, followed by a slash-delimited list of constants like that
used in a DATA statement.  An example of the syntax is
.br
.in +5
\fCINTEGER  N / 100 /\fR
.in -5
.br
This form of initializing declaration was not
adopted in Fortran 90.  Such declarations should be written using
the standard form:
.br
.in +5
\fCINTEGER ::  N = 100\fR
.in -5
.br
.PP
Many commonly found nonstandard intrinsic functions are provided.  See
the discussion of \fB\-intrinsic\fP for a list of supported intrinsic
functions and how to
control which ones are recognized.
.PP
Argument checking is not tight for those intrinsics
that take arrays or mixed argument types.
.PP
The Fortran 90 standard defines the INCLUDE statement, which causes
inclusion of the text of the given file.  The syntax is
.br
.in +5
\fCINCLUDE '\fR\fIfilename\fP\fC'\fR
.in -5
.br
If the \fB\-source=vms\-include\fP option is given, \fBftnchek\fP follows
VMS conventions with respect to this statement: it assumes a default
extension of \fI.\|for\fP if no filename extension is given, and
allows the qualifier \fC/[NO]LIST\fR following the filename, to
control the listing of the included file.  There is no support for
including VMS text modules.
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP accepts PARAMETER statements which lack
parentheses.  These will be warned about if the
\fB\-f77=param\-noparen\fP flag is given.
.PP
\fBftnchek\fP accepts PARAMETER definitions that involve
intrinsic functions
and exponentiation by a non-integer exponent.  Both of these cases are
prohibited by the Fortran 77
Standard, and will be warned about if the \fB\-f77=param\-intrinsic\fP
flag is given.  If an intrinsic function value
is a compile-time integer constant,
\fBftnchek\fP will evaluate it.  This allows better checking if the
parameter is used in declaring array sizes or character lengths, or as
a kind parameter.  Fortran 90 allows
intrinsic functions in PARAMETER definitions.
.PP
The intrinsic functions that are evaluated are:
\fC
.TS
center;
l l l l l.
ABS	ICHAR	KIND	MIN	SELECTED_INT_KIND
DIM	IDIM	LEN	MIN0	SELECTED_REAL_KIND
IABS	INDEX	MAX	MOD	SIGN
IACHAR	ISIGN	MAX0	MODULO	SIZE
.TE
\fR
.br
The functions of integer arguments are evaluated only if the arguments
are integer constant expressions.  (These may involve integer
constants, parameters, and evaluated intrinsic functions.)  The
function LEN is evaluated if its argument is an expression
involving only character constants and variables whose length is not
adjustable.  The functions ICHAR, IACHAR, and INDEX are evaluated
only if the arguments are character constants.  The function KIND is
evaluated for any argument.  The function SIZE is evaluated for any
array argument whose size is fixed.   \fBftnchek\fP gives a
warning if it needs the value of some intrinsic function that is not
evaluated.
.RE
\}
.\" The above brace is the end of the .if !\nb at section "OPTIONS"
.\" The following section is included in the blurb.
.SH "NEW FEATURES"
This section will document future improvements to \fBftnchek\fR after
the initial release of version 4.0.  Relative to the previous version,
namely 3.3.1, the improvements can be summarized as follows:
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
1.
Fortran 95 is now largely supported.  Previously only some Fortran 90
syntax was supported.  See the section on Limitations for what remains
to be implemented to fully support Fortran 95.
.\" Omit sections "BUGS" and "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS" from blurb
.if !\nb \{
.SH "BUGS"
\fBftnchek\fP still has much room for improvement.
Your feedback is appreciated.  We want to know about any bugs you notice.
Bugs include not only cases in which \fBftnchek\fP issues an error message
where no error exists, but also if \fBftnchek\fP fails to issue a warning when
it ought to.  Note, however, that \fBftnchek\fP is not intended to catch all
syntax errors (see section on Limitations).
Also, it is not considered a bug for a variable to be
reported as used before set, if the reason is that the usage of the
variable occurs prior in the text to where the variable is set.  For
instance, this could occur when a GOTO causes execution to loop backward
to some previously skipped statements.  \fBftnchek\fP does not analyze the
program flow, but assumes that statements occurring earlier in the text
are executed before the following ones.
.PP
We especially want to know if \fBftnchek\fP crashes for any reason.  It is
not supposed to crash, even on programs with syntax errors.  Suggestions
are welcomed for additional features which you would find useful.  Tell
us if any of \fBftnchek\fP's
messages are incomprehensible.  Comments on the
readability and accuracy of this document are also welcome.
.PP
You may also suggest support for additional extensions to the
Fortran language.  These will be included only if it is felt that the
extensions are sufficiently widely accepted by compilers.
.PP
If you find a bug in \fBftnchek\fP,
first consult the list of known bugs
below to see if it has already been reported.  Also check the section
entitled ``Limitations and Extensions'' above for restrictions
that could be causing the problem.  If you do not find the problem
documented in either place, then send a report including
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
1.
The operating system and CPU type on which \fBftnchek\fP is running.
.TP
2.
The version of \fBftnchek\fP and values of any environment options or
settings defined in startup file.  (Capturing the output of \fCftnchek
-help\fR is useful for this.)
.TP
3.
A brief description of the bug.
.TP
4.
If possible, a small sample program showing the bug.
.PP
.br
The report should be sent to Dr. Robert Moniot (see contact information
in section entitled ``Installation and Support'').
.PP
Highest priority will be given to bugs which cause \fBftnchek\fP to crash.
.PP
Certain problems that arise when checking large programs can be fixed
by increasing the sizes of the data areas in \fBftnchek\fP.  (These
problems are generally signaled by error messages beginning with ``Oops''.)
The simplest way to increase the table sizes is by
recompiling \fBftnchek\fP with the \fCLARGE_MACHINE\fR macro name
defined.  Consult the \fCmakefile\fR and \fCREADME\fR file for the
method of doing this.
.PP
The following is a list of known bugs.
.TP \w'1.'u+2n
1.
Bug: Used-before-set message is suppressed for any variable which
is used as the loop index in an implied-do loop, even if it was in
fact used before being set in some earlier statement.
For example, consider \fCJ\fR in the statement
.RS
.PP
.nf
\fC      WRITE(5,*) (A(J), J=1,10)\fR
.fi
.PP
Here \fBftnchek\fP parses the I/O expression,
\fCA(J)\fR, where \fCJ\fR is used, before it parses the implied loop
where \fCJ\fR is set.  Normally this would cause
\fBftnchek\fP to report a spurious used-before-set warning for \fCJ\fR.
Since this report is usually in error and occurs fairly commonly,
\fBftnchek\fP suppresses the warning for \fCJ\fR altogether.
.PP
Prognosis: To be fixed in a future version of \fBftnchek\fP.
.RE
.TP
2.
Bug: Variables used (not as arguments) in statement-function
subprograms do not have their usage status updated when the statement
function is invoked.
.RS
.PP
Prognosis: To be fixed in a future version of \fBftnchek\fP.
.RE
.TP
3.
Bug: VAX version does not expand wildcards in filenames on the
command line if they are followed without space by an option, e.g.
\fCftnchek *.f/calltree\fR would not expand the \fC*.f\fR.
This is because VMS-style options without intervening
space are not supported by the GNU \fCshell_mung\fR routine that is used
to expand wildcards.
.RS
.PP
Prognosis: unlikely to be fixed.
.RE
.TP
4.
Bug: checking for nonstandard format edit descriptors is done only in
FORMAT statements, not in character strings used as formats.
.RS
.PP
Prognosis: may be fixed someday.
.RE

.SH "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS"
\fBftnchek\fP
was designed by Dr. Robert Moniot, professor at Fordham
University.  During the academic year of
1988-1989, Michael Myers and Lucia Spagnuolo developed the program to
perform the variable usage checks.  During the following year it was
augmented by Lois Bigbie to check subprogram arguments and
COMMON block declarations.
Brian Downing assisted with the implementation of the INCLUDE
statement.
John Quinn wrote the common block usage checks.
Heba Elsayed wrote the label table printout and label usage checks.
Nelson H. F. Beebe of the University of Utah added most of the new code
to implement the \fB\-makedcls\fP feature and wrote the dcl2inc script.
The \fB\-mkhtml\fP feature was contributed by Mark McVeigh of
Framatome ANP, Inc.
The \fB\-calltree=reference\fP feature was contributed by Gerome Emmanuel,
Ecole des mines, U. Nancy (slightly modified).
The \fB\-calltree=vcg\fP option
was contributed by Dr. Philip Rubini of Cranfield University, UK.
The support for Cray pointer syntax was provided by John Dannenhoffer of
United Technologies Research Center.
John C. Bollinger of Indiana University added the parser syntax for
the \fCSELECT CASE\fR construct.
Robert Landrito added the parser syntax for F90 pointer-related features.
Gaurav Gautam of HCL Technologies, Noida India, contributed code for
support of F90 pointers and allocatable arrays.
.PP
A special acknowledgement is due to the U.S. Department of Defense
High Performance Computing Modernization Program, which funded a
year-long graduate assistantship to upgrade \fBftnchek\fP to support Fortran 95.
The upgrade might never have happened without this support.
Karma Shrestha performed the implementation of most of the new syntax.
.PP
As of Version 2.5, the name was changed from \fBforchek\fP to \fBftnchek\fP,
to avoid confusion with a
similar program named \fBforcheck\fP,
developed earlier at Leiden University.
.PP
We would like to thank
John Amor of the University of British Columbia,
Reg Clemens of the Air Force Phillips Lab in Albuquerque,
Markus Draxler of the University of Stuttgart,
Victor Eijkhout of the University of Tennessee at Knoxville,
Greg Flint of Purdue University,
Daniel P. Giesy of NASA Langley Research Center,
Fritz Keinert of Iowa State University,
Judah Milgram of the University of Maryland College Park,
Hugh Nicholas of the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center,
Dan Severance of Yale University,
Phil Sterne of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Larry Weissman of the University of Washington,
Warren J. Wiscombe of NASA Goddard,
and
Nelson H. F. Beebe of the University of Utah,
for pointing out bugs and suggesting some improvements.
Stefan A. Deutscher,
Gunnar Duus,
Clive Page of the University of Leicester,
Stephan Wefing of Heidelberg University,
and
Bob Wells of Oxford University
were extremely helpful as alpha testers.
We also thank Jack Dongarra for putting
\fBftnchek\fP into the \fCnetlib\fR
library of publicly available software,
and Mark Brown of the University of Edinburgh for acting as
the \fBftnchek\fP package maintainer for Debian.
Thanks also to SourceForge
http://www.sourceforge.net
for hosting the \fBftnchek\fP source code repository.
\}
.\" The above brace is the end of the .if !\nb at section "BUGS"
.\" The following section is included in the blurb.
.SH "INSTALLATION AND SUPPORT"
The \fBftnchek\fP program is free software.
Version 3.3.1 is included as a standard package in many Linux
distributions, including Fedora and Debian.  It is hoped that when
Version 4 becomes stable, these distributions will update it.
The source code can be obtained
by anonymous ftp from many software servers, including
ftp://netlib.org/fortran .
Note that on Netlib the distribution is named \fIftnchek\|.tar\|.gz\fP
whereas on most other servers the file name includes the version
number, e.g. \fIftnchek-3.3.0\|.tar\|.gz\fP.
If the file extension is \fI.\|Z\fP, uncompress with the Unix
.BR uncompress (1)
utility.  If the file extension is \fI.\|gz\fP, uncompress with the
GNU
.BR gunzip (1L)
program.  Then use
.BR tar (1)
to unpack the files into a subdirectory.
.PP
Installation requires a C compiler for your computer.
See the INSTALL file provided with the distribution for
instructions on installing \fBftnchek\fP on your system.
Executable binary for particular systems such as IBM PC or
Macintosh, as available, can be obtained by anonymous ftp from
ftp://ftp.dsm.fordham.edu/pub/ftnchek .
Assistance in preparing such executable binary forms is welcome.
.\" Omit the following paragraph from the blurb
.if !\nb \{
.PP
The \fBnroff\fP version of this document is named
.IR ftnchek.\|man .
On UNIX systems, this file can be used as the man page,
but actually it is a multi-purpose source file which is used to produce
the other forms of the documentation.  The cleaned-up man page
document, created during installation of \fBftnchek\fP, is named
.IR ftnchek.\|1 .
The distribution also includes a plain ASCII version named
.IR ftnchek.\|doc ,
a PostScript version named
.IR ftnchek.\|ps ,
an HTML version in directory
.IR html ,
and a VMS HELP version named
.IR ftnchek.\|hlp .
\}
.\" End of paragraph omitted from the blurb
.PP
Information about the latest version and the status of the project can be
obtained
by visiting \fBftnchek\fP's home page,
http://www.dsm.fordham.edu/~ftnchek .
For further information and to report bugs, you may contact
Dr. Robert Moniot, whose contact information
can be found by a Web search for his name and Fordham University.
(E-mail address is not provided here because it attracts unsolicited
commercial e-mail, but it is easily constructed by combining his last
name with the name of the university and the edu domain.)
.\" Omit the following section from the blurb
.if !\nb \{
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dcl2inc (1L),
.BR dtoq (1L),
.BR dtos (1L),
.BR f77 (1),
.BR fd2s (1L),
.BR fs2d (1L),
.BR ftnpp (1L),
.BR pfort (1L),
.BR qtod (1L),
.BR sf3 (1L),
.BR stod (1L).
.BR xsf3 (1L),
.BR xvcg (1L).
\}
.\" End of section omitted from the blurb
.\" ==============================[The End]==============================
